The people asked for it, but a RRS Boaty McBoatface will probably never leave the dock, the British government has suggested.
Britain's Natural Environment Research Council asked the public to vote on a name for its new $286 million polar research vessel. It confirmed that the votes were overwhelmingly in favor of naming the state-of-the-art ship Boaty McBoatface. The suggestion received 124,109 votes. That is four times more than second-place choice, the RRS Poppy-Mai. She is a 16-month-old girl who is very sick.
Duncan Wingham is head of the NERC. He will have the final say in the naming of the boat, but this leaves him with a problem. He can delight the public and anger the scientific community, or lose the good feeling the survey has generated. Several public relations, or PR, experts have urged Wingham to keep the name to maintain public interest in the story.
However, Jo Johnson, the science minister, hinted that the government was preparing to change the name. “The new royal research ship will be sailing into the world’s iciest waters to address global challenges that affect the lives of hundreds of millions of people, including global warming, the melting of polar ice and rising sea levels,” he said. “That’s why we want a name that lasts longer than a social media news cycle and reflects the serious nature of the science it will be doing."
A Boat By Any Other Name
Experts are divided as to how the NERC should respond to the naming survey.
“They should stick with the public decision,” said Bob Ward. He is a climate change expert at the London School of Economics. “If a new name is chosen, that is saying: ‘We don’t trust the public,’ but people would soon forget about it.
“On the other hand, if they keep the name, then the interest in the vessel will also endure. It doesn’t have to be a problem for them. And it makes no difference to the vital work the ship will be carrying out, but it does mean there is likely to be more public interest in that work.”
Other PR experts said the interest could be retained without having to give the boat a ridiculous name. Tom Sheldon is a senior press officer at the Science Media Centre. He also emphasized how the story has put the NERC in the news. “Lots of people in science seem to see this as a bit of a PR disaster, but I think the opposite,” he said.
“The entire nation have been discussing a polar research ship. And they’ve all heard of NERC. How many other scientific research councils could they name?”
Sheldon said he did not think any goodwill would be lost if a different name was chosen. “Even if NERC picks a name with more gravitas, I seriously doubt there will be any public indignation; we’ve had fun with this, and it will always be Boaty McBoatface to the nation,” he said.
Fun With Copycat Names
“(News anchor) Evan Davis signed off the BBC2 flagship news program with Newsy McNewsnight. There is now a horse called Horsey McHorseFace. It’s captured our attention, made us laugh, and spawned a new meme. How many science public engagement exercises can you say that about?” Sheldon said.
Michael Tinmouth is a social media expert who has worked with some major brands. He said he did not expect to see  Boaty McBoatface become the ship's name, but he also urged the NERC to own the story.
“It’s a childish name, so it’s an opportunity to engage with a younger generation,” he said. “If I was them, I would get a team of designers and brand experts together and do something like develop a cartoon or a project for younger children which features a character called Boaty McBoatface, even if the boat isn’t actually called that."
What's All The Fuss?
The name was first proposed by James Hand, a former BBC radio announcer. He expressed surprise at the fuss Boaty McBoatface had caused.
Hand said he stood by Boaty McBoatface as a “brilliant name” for the research ship. However, he did not vote for the name. Hand voted for RRS David Attenborough, which came in fifth with 10,284 votes. Another less serious name – RSS It’s Bloody Cold Here – was fourth in the voting.
      
      