CHICAGO, Ill. — Cancer is a terrible disease that kills many people every year. There are many different types of cancer. Some can be cured or managed with medicine. Others can be prevented.
A new study says that many deadly cancer cases have one thing in common. More than 1 in 4 of deaths from cancer in the United States are linked to cigarette smoking, according to the study.
The study was done by the American Cancer Society, a group that supports cancer research. Researchers calculated the number of deaths from cancer that were caused in part by smoking cigarettes. Then they found the total number of deaths caused by cancer. They compared these two numbers to get a rate. The rate shows what portion of cancer deaths are linked to smoking.
Smoky Southern States
The researchers found that this rate is the highest for men in Southern states. It is especially high in Arkansas, where 4 out of 10 cancer deaths are linked to cigarette smoking. Kentucky had the highest rate among women. It was about 3 out of 10. 
The study also identified the 10 states with the highest rates of cancer deaths connected with smoking. Most of them were in the South. Smoking is more common in the South than in the North, and the rules against it are not as strict there. The lowest rates were in Utah. 
The authors of the study reviewed health surveys from 2014, in which people answered questions about smoking and their health. The scientists also studied information gathered by the government. They looked at facts about people who smoked. They counted the number of people who had passed away from different many types of cancers. Lung, throat, stomach, liver, colon, pancreas and kidney cancers were included.
CDC Says These Deaths Can Be Avoided
Fewer people in the United States are smoking than in the past. However, 40 million U.S. adults still smoke cigarettes, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). This government agency studies how to prevent diseases. The CDC says smoking is the top cause of deaths that could be avoided. 
The study found that least 167,000 cancer deaths in 2014 were connected to smoking. This makes up almost 1 out of every 3 cancer-caused deaths in the United States. 
Smoking is more common among men than women. Among men, the rate of death from cancers caused by cigarettes was highest in African-Americans. Among women, whites had the highest rate. 
The study also found that rules to stop smoking are less strict in the South. Researchers found 14 states that do not have complete bans on indoor smoking. Nine of these were in the South.
Power Of Tobacco Companies
Taxes on cigarettes are lower overall in the South, the study showed. That is because most major producers of tobacco, the plant used to make cigarettes, are located in the South. In states that grow tobacco, the average product tax on cigarettes is 49 cents. In other parts of the country this tax is $1.80. 
Tobacco companies have a big impact on these policies, the researchers said. They want people to keep buying cigarettes to help their businesses. 
Dr. Hilary Tindle works at Vanderbilt University in Nashville, Tennessee. She studies tobacco use in the South. She was not involved in the cancer study.
Tindle said the results of the study match what she sees in her own research and medical practice in the South. The medical center she works at does not allow smoking indoors. However, she said it's not unusual to walk through a cloud of cigarette smoke outside the entrance.
Tindle said the study shows the need for stronger laws that control smoking. She said that doctors should discuss smoking at every patient visit. They should encourage smokers to quit and tell them how to do so, she said.
      
      