CHICAGO, Ill. — Cancer is a terrible disease. It kills many people every year. 
There are different types of cancer. Many can be cured or managed with medicine. Others can be prevented.
A new study says that many of the worst cases have something in common. They are linked to cigarettes. 
The American Cancer Society did the study. This group researches how to prevent and treat cancer. The study says that 1 out of every 4 deaths caused by cancer involved cigarette smoking. 
This number was even higher in certain states.
Cancer Deaths Are High Where Smoking Is Common
For men in Arkansas, 4 out of 10 deaths from cancer are linked to smoking. The number is highest overall for men in Southern states.
The study also lists the 10 states where cancer-related deaths were more likely to involve smoking. Most are in the South. Smoking is more common there. The rules against smoking are not very tough. 
Scientists looked at a great deal of information for the study. They read health surveys. They also checked government data and facts.
Smoking Rules Are Not The Same In All States
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) is a government group. It studies diseases. The CDC says fewer people smoke now than in the past. Yet there are still 40 million adult smokers in the United States. Smoking is a leading cause of death in this country. These deaths could be prevented, the CDC said. 
The study says that 167,000 cancer deaths in 2014 were caused by smoking. This is about one-third of all U.S. cancer deaths. Nearly 600,000 people die from cancer each year. The study also listed 14 states that do not fully ban smoking indoors. Nine are in the South.
Taxes Might Also Play A Role
People also pay less tax on cigarettes in the South. Tobacco is grown in southern states. Cigarettes are made from tobacco. In states where tobacco is an important crop, the average tax on cigarettes is 49 cents. In other parts of the country, it is $1.80. Tobacco companies have a big say on these rules.
Hilary Tindle is a doctor and scientist in Tennessee. She studies tobacco in the South. She did not work on the new study.
Tindle said the study matches what she sees in her work. It shows the need for stronger laws about smoking. She also said that doctors should talk to every patient about smoking. They have to help smokers to quit, she added.
      
      