GUADALAJARA, Mexico — When most people think of technology companies, they think of California. That is where Silicon Valley is. Silicon Valley is the home of companies like Apple and Facebook. Most people do not think of Mexico.
One Mexican city, Guadalajara, has become a center for technology, though. It is the capital of the Mexican state of Jalisco. Government help and cheap workers have brought tech companies to the city. It has even been called "the next Silicon Valley."

Mexico is not known for technology. The country has been having many problems. Criminal groups have made money selling drugs. Now, they have a lot of power. They fight with the government and each other. Many people have been killed in these "drug wars." Most of these crimes go unpunished.
Guadalajara Conditions Better
Jalisco is calmer than other parts of the country. There is less crime here. Business has been able to do well as a result. Many American companies have started sending work to Guadalajara. 
Anurag Kumar says  working in Jalisco is almost like working in the United States.  He is the co-founder and head of iTexico. iTexico is a Texas software company. Many of its workers are in Guadalajara.
Kumar has worked with Mexican teams for five years. He flies in twice a month from Texas. He says he thinks Mexico is good for new tech companies. They are close to the U.S., and trade between the two countries is not hard. Shipping to the U.S. is also fast and easy.
U.S. Helping Local Businesses
It is not just outside companies that are doing well. New companies from Guadalajara are also succeeding. Businesses in the U.S. are giving them money to help them grow.   
Guillermo González King is a Jalisco businessman. He says he thinks Guadalajara has a good future in technology. Still, he says some people think that Mexico is not safe. 
Tourism to Mexico has declined significantly. Half of all Mexicans are poor. Criminals often fight publicly with the police. 
Great Hopes For Technology
Enrique Alfaro is the new mayor of Guadalajara. He says he thinks that technology could change the city.
He admits it is hard. There are not many jobs here, he says. Because of this, it is easy for criminals to find new people to work for them. 
It may take a while to change what people think about Mexico. Still, many people are hopeful about the future of Guadalajara. One of them is Kumar. He says he thinks there can be larger companies in Mexico. The country has many good things to offer.
      
      