The number of U.S. teens kept in some type of prison has been dropping steeply. Over the last 15 years, it has gone from about 76,000 to fewer than 36,000. In the past, many youths convicted of crimes ended up being housed in some prisonlike setting. Increasingly, they are instead being offered alternatives, such as electronic monitoring or counseling.
Still, about 80 large youth prisons remain open, according to a new report. The new study was prepared by the group Youth First. 
Youth First and other supporters of prison reform want the old youth prisons shut down entirely. However, not everyone agrees that is realistic, or even desirable. Here are five quick questions and answers that explain the debate.
1. How is a youth prison different from other places that house youth offenders?
Youth prisons are operated by states rather than counties. Many have more than 100 beds. They are typically prisonlike, with locked doors, barbed wire fences and a remote, rural location. Prisoners serve long sentences, and little education or therapy is provided. Often, the prisons are very old. The Youth First report includes dozens that have been in existence for more than a century.
Meanwhile, alternatives to prison, such as juvenile detention centers or residential treatment programs, are smaller and run locally. They hold minors for shorter periods of time.
2. Are some states already shutting down youth prisons?
California, Texas and Missouri have moved away from this type of prison, as has New York City. They are now choosing instead to place more youth in smaller, local settings and programs. In addition, Virginia, Illinois, Connecticut and Wisconsin are considering closing down their own largest institutions.
America’s largest juvenile prisons are now decreasing in population faster than any other setting for juvenile offenders. These large prisons were designed to hold more than 200 prisoners.
3. Why should we close youth prisons?
Critics claim these prisons are very out of date. The idea of housing juveniles in a large, remote and faceless institution, they say, goes against everything scientists now know about the teenage brain.
Because such prisons are geographically isolated, it is extremely difficult for juvenile prisoners to maintain relationships with people back home. It can also be very difficult for them to remain engaged with their schoolwork. Finally, it is extremely hard for them to keep up with the social and recreational activities they used to love. 
Personal connections and recreational activities are key to reforming juvenile offenders, critics say. Lessening prisoners' exposure to both makes little sense. In these remote prisons, youths are exposed to a harsh, lifeless physical environment and high rates of violence. Such experiences stunt their ability to trust, engage and learn.
Research shows that what teenagers need most is a stable relationship with someone they can count on. It is absolutely impossible to establish such a relationship in a large, harshly run and violent institution, critics say.
4. What are the reasons for not shutting down youth prisons?
Judges see their responsibility as keeping the community safe. They believe they need to send some violent offenders to secure buildings far away from the general public. For many judges and policymakers, it is not clear there are any other reliable ways to keep the public safe.
Anne Nelsen is the president of the Council for Juvenile Corrections. “Historically, a lot of kids have been locked up in these larger institutions because judges don't have other places to send them,” she says. “Are we sure that such alternatives are now available everywhere, including in rural areas?”
Shutting down youth prisons is a nice idea, she says. However, her focus is on "making sure kids get the services they need at the places that do exist.”
5. Does it save money to close youth prisons?
There is no easy answer to this question. Many states believe it is cheaper to house everyone in one place rather than spending on a network of local, individualized services. Alternatives to prison, such as counseling, drug treatment, family therapy and community centers, can be expensive. However, many of the oldest, largest prisons now have unfilled beds, because of a steady drop in juvenile crime. These unfilled beds sharply raise the per-prisoner cost of running such institutions. Indeed, the per-prisoner cost ends up being higher than most alternatives.
“You hear all this talk of saving money," says Liz Ryan, president of Youth First. What states need to realize, she says, is that just having fewer prisoners in the big prisons will not lead to real savings. To see savings, states need to reduce the number of guards and other employees. In the end, she says, they should simply close down these prisons.

Staff writer Eli Hager's work has appeared in the Washington Post and elsewhere.

      
      