Astronauts traveling through space are exposed to radiation, which is a type of energy. Recent findings from the University of California-Irvine School of Medicine suggest that a deep space journey to Mars could cause long-term brain damage.
Radiation from space constantly travels toward Earth. Our planet’s magnetic field deflects the most harmful rays of energy, but that’s not the case on Mars. Too few astronauts have been exposed to large amounts of space radiation on moon trips for an in-depth brain study. The closest examples on Earth come from cancer patients and nuclear bomb survivors. Cancer treatments and nuclear bombs expose people to higher concentrated amounts of radiation than one would find in deep space. 
Intentional human studies of the effects are impossible because no one would want to volunteer. Animal tests are one of the only ways to see how a constant lower dose of radiation over a long period could affect the brain.
Testing Was Done On Mice And Rats
This study began at the NASA Space Radiation Laboratory in New York. Scientists exposed mice and rats to radioactive isotopes of titanium and oxygen, which are both found in rays from space. Once complete, this team sent their specimens to Charles Limoli. He is a radiation oncologist studying how radiation can treat cancer at the University of California-Irvine School of Medicine.
Within six months, the researchers found brain swelling and permanent damage to communication networks between brain cells. The rats and mice lost their ability to master easy tasks, suggesting that the radiation affected learning and memory. The researchers called this effect “space brain.”
“This is not positive news for astronauts deployed on a two-to-three-year journey to Mars,” Limoli said of his October 10 study in Scientific Reports. Limoli said that many of these brain problems could continue and get worse throughout one's life.
Fear Extinction Disappears
The galactic rays also affected a process called “fear extinction.” When you undergo a terrifying experience, you develop a fear related to that experience. With gradual exposure to that fear-inducing experience, you become accustomed to the activity again, and the fear goes away. For example, if you nearly drown, you could become afraid of water. As you spend time around or in the water after the experience, that fear starts to become less intense. 
When the rats and mice experienced space radiation, Limoli said that “fear extinction” stopped occurring. If the same thing happened in humans, people would become anxious, depressed and worse at making decisions.
Study Offers Specifics On Brain Radiation
Lawrence Townsend is a nuclear engineer and former NASA researcher. He was not involved in this study. He said this research reveals more specifics on the effect of space-level radiation on the brain.
Townsend said we have seen brain damage from radiation in humans before. Certain cancer patients receive radiation therapy, and people have been exposed to radiation from atomic bombs. “However, these exposures were from radiations that differ significantly in quality from those found in space,” he said.
Human travel to Mars is years away. In the meantime, Limoli said this research could improve radiation treatments for cancer by describing the long-term side effects on the brain.
      
      