Barron Trump is going to be the new first kid. He is 10 years old and is the son of President Donald Trump. Now he lives in New York City. When school ends, he might move to the White House. He would be the first boy to live there in 50 years.
The Washington Post newspaper talked to some 10-year-old kids. They talked about what it would be like. They have some ideas for Barron. The newspaper also checked in with Edward Lengel. He is the chief historian of the White House Historical Association. The group teaches people about the White House.
Grady Harris is 10 years old. He said he would throw big parties and invite his friends.
Dacy Matarasso is also 10. Dacy said it would probably be hard to live there.
Kids talked about how they would fix up their bedroom.
Walker Woodward would get an ice cream machine.
Dylan Henry would paint a whole wall blue and make space scenes. He would hang little planets from the ceiling and a spaceship.
Pigs, Dogs And Cats
There's a lot of good things about living in the White House. It has a bowling alley and a movie theater. Other people clean, cook and do the dishes.
The White House can be busy. Many people work and visit. It can be hard for kids to be alone, but White House kids have managed. President Teddy Roosevelt's kids crawled around between the walls, Lengel said.
Amy Carter is the daughter of President Jimmy Carter. She had a treehouse.
A few furry friends are always welcome. Walker would like to have lots of dogs and cats.
"If we could get a pig, that would be really cool," Dylan said.
Being On Your Best Behavior
Dylan could probably have a pig at the White House. Tad Lincoln was the son of President Abraham Lincoln. He was only 7 years old when he moved into the White House. He brought his pony inside. One of his pet goats slept next to him in bed.
President Teddy Roosevelt's family had the most pets. They had dogs, snakes, cats and birds. They even had a pony named Algonquin. It rode in the White House elevator.
There is one downside to being the first kid. They have to behave.
"You have to be really good," Grady said.
"You should be on your best behavior, and not fight with your little brother," Emily said. She sighed. That can be really hard.
      
      