Some people have a hard time getting to their voting place. Astronaut Shane Kimbrough is one of them. 
Living 250 miles above the Earth makes for a long trip.
Instead, Kimbrough voted in a special way. The new way was established in the 1990s to help astronauts "vote while they float." Kimbrough is the only American on the International Space Station (ISS) this Election Day.
When you're away from your planet, small things do have a large effect, said David Wolf. He is an astronaut who spoke to National Public Radio. Wolf was the first space traveler to use the new way of voting. It was in 1997, while he was living on the Mir space station. The Mir station is operated by Russia.
Finding A Way To Let Astronauts Vote From Space
A year earlier, an astronaut on the Mir space station, John Blaha, hadn't been able to vote. Blaha mentioned the problem to Susan Anderson. She is a leader at NASA, the government's space agency.
Anderson reached out to Mike Jackson, the state senator for the area of Texas that includes Johnson Space Center. Senators are responsible for making laws. Anderson and Jackson suggested that astronauts be able to vote from space. It would be done by computer.
That year, George W. Bush, who was governor of Texas at the time, signed the bill. It allowed early voting from space.
People vote using a ballot, or a voting ticket. Astronauts get a copy of the ballot by computer, said Stan Stanart. He works in a voting office. "It's the same ballot that anyone would get by mail," he said. Ballots are mailed because some people can't go to a voting place. 
The astronaut receives the ballot copy in an email. The astronaut fills it out and sends it back to the voting office. A worker copies the votes onto a regular ballot. Only the worker and the astronaut know how the astronaut voted.
His Vote Will Count Like Everyone Else's
It's exciting when "you've got a message from outer space," said Mary Ann Daigle. She worked in a voting office.
Before going to the ISS in October, Kimbrough talked to news reporters. He told reporters that astronauts are not very political. Being political could mean saying how they will vote. "I'll be glad to welcome the new president, whoever that is," Kimbrough said.
NASA said that Kimbrough sent his ballot in the past few days. He'll get his vote counted, just like millions of other Americans. The only thing he is missing is getting an "I voted" sticker.
Ah, well. As Kimbrough himself said, it's worth it to be able to tell people "I voted from space."
      
      