NEW YORK, N.Y. — Central Park is a huge green space in the middle of New York City. You could walk through it past statues of famous people including explorer Christopher Columbus, founding father Alexander Hamilton, and playwright William Shakespeare. Suddenly you may think, where are the women?
There are none. That is if you don't count pretend people like Mother Goose and Alice in Wonderland.
Even a dog has its place among the park's greenery. Every one of the 23 statues of real humans in the park is of a famous man.
Statue Will Honor Two Important Women
Some Girl Scouts are now trying to change that. They've joined others who are raising money for a new park statue. It would be dedicated to two women who changed the country. The women are suffragists Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony. Suffragists are people who fight to give people the right to vote, especially women.
Pamela Elam is leading the fight along with Stanton's great-great-granddaughter, Coline Jenkins.
They are part of a fundraiser. It is called Central Park, Where Are The Women? Their aim is to put up a statue of the two women by 2020. The year would mark the 100-year anniversary of women getting the right to vote. Women were not allowed to vote in the United States until 1920.
"Mother Goose" Doesn't Count
"There are no statues of women, and there's tons of men," says Pippa Lee. She is a 10-year-old Girl Scout in New York City. "We really need a woman's statue for girls to look up to, not just Mother Goose or Alice in Wonderland. They don't count."
The idea has drawn the support of the Central Park Conservancy. The group spends millions of dollars to help make the park beautiful. Parks Commissioner Mitchell Silver also supports the suffragist statue.
Group Has Raised $150,000 For Statue
A group called the Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony Statue Fund Inc. is already raising money. They have collected at least $150,000 of about $500,000 needed. This money will be used to make and care for the statue. About the same amount would cover plants around the statue. It would also pay for an educational program.
Across the street is the New York Historical Society. They plan shows and talks on key women in American history.
On a bright fall day, 10 Girl Scouts joined other supporters in the park to make their case. Stori Small is 10 years old. She said that she wants women to be represented by real people. "I don't want it to be a cartoon character," she said.
Kids Collect Money From People On Street
One day in Central Park, the fifth-graders collected $123 from people on the street. They chanted "Where are the women?" and wore sunflowers in their hair. The sunflower is a symbol of the suffragists.
The girls plan to collect more money on Thursdays through the fall.
Any artist may send in a statue design following certain guidelines. The finalists' models will be displayed at the New York Historical Society. A group of experts will pick the winner sometime next year.
      
      