Scientists have made chickens with ancient dinosaur legs. Well, sort of.
Technically, chickens already have dinosaur legs. Millions of years ago, all the Earth's dinosaurs were wiped out. One bird-like dinosaur was called the Archaeopteryx. Most scientists agree that modern birds came from the Archaeopteryx. This dino bird is the link between dinosaurs and modern birds.
Chicken, Meet Your Cousin T. Rex
Scientists can learn more about long-lost dinosaurs by studying birds such as chickens. One experiment used chickens to understand how dinosaurs walked. Early dinosaurs had big tails. So scientists stuck big fake tails on the chickens' butts to see how they would walk. The chickens walked with wide and heavy steps, kind of like a Tyrannosaurus rex.
Scientists in Chile created the chickens with funky dinosaur legs by changing the chickens' DNA. DNA gives directions to your body. It tells your body how to grow. DNA even tells bones how to grow.
Back To The Egg
Modern birds have leg bones that are different from their ancient ancestors. One of the two leg bones below the knee is called the fibula. In older dinosaurs, the fibula was long and tube-shaped. In modern birds, the fibula is thin and shorter.
It took a long time for the leg bone in the old bird dinosaur to become the leg bone in a chicken. The DNA changed slowly over millions of years. Chickens still have some old-bird dinosaur DNA. The old-bird DNA shows up when chickens are really young. Chickens have old-bird dinosaur fibulas for a little while in the egg. Then the new chicken DNA tells the leg bone to turn into a chicken leg bone. We call it the drumstick.
The scientists in Chile figured out how to stop the chicken DNA from telling the leg bone to change. The chicken listened to the old DNA from the dinosaur bird. The legs became dinosaur legs, not chicken legs.
No Little Fuzzy Dino-Chicks
Scientists have changed the DNA in chickens before. One group changed the beak DNA. The chickens ended up with a reptilian nose like dinosaurs in the movies.
Bird DNA and dinosaur DNA look alike. 
Scientists can test the link between birds and dinosaurs in the lab, said Alexander Vargas. He is one of the scientists that made the chicken dinosaurs.
None of the experiments end up with live chickens, though. Everything took place inside the egg. The birds were not allowed to hatch. Don't expect to see dino-chickens running around the barnyard anytime soon.
      
      