Dancing? Don't do it, Antonio Brown.
Pretending to shoot a bow and arrow? No way, Josh Norman and Brandin Cooks.
Taking off your helmet? Nope, Odell Beckham Jr.
Shooting a jump shot through the goal post? Forget about it, Vernon Davis.
The "No Fun League"?
National Football League (NFL) officials are calling some celebrations out of bounds. They also don't allow players to taunt, or tease, the other team. 
Officials have been calling more penalties, or punishments, on players as part of the league's push for improved behavior. Thanks to similar crackdowns over the years, the sport has earned the nickname of the "No Fun League." Now, some players and fans wonder if the NFL has gone too far.
Davis was given a penalty for flipping the football like a basketball over the goal post last Sunday. He did this "jump shot" after making a touchdown catch. His team, Washington, was playing the Philadelphia Eagles.
"All Of A Sudden It's A Penalty"
"I didn't know it was a penalty. I was doing that when I was in San Francisco and now all of a sudden it's a penalty," Davis said.
"You're just shooting the ball over the goal post," he said in the locker room after the game. He said he was just celebrating. "All I can do is correct it next time and not shoot it," Davis said.
That's what the NFL wants to hear.
A committee of the NFL reviews this issue every year, NFL Commissioner Roger Goodell said Wednesday. 
He added that the NFL wants to hold players to certain levels of behavior. Leaders of the league believe that football players are role models, he said. 
Taking Joy Out Of The Game?
This push for better sportsmanship has led to a larger number of penalties this season compared to last year. As of Week 6, the league has given 16 penalties for excessive celebrations. There were 10 at this point last year. There have been 21 penalties for taunting, up from 11 last season.
Some sports reporters have criticized the league for setting rules that take joy out of the game. 
Cooks, who plays for the New Orleans Saints, has not been punished for pretending to shoot a bow and arrow after big plays. Washington player Josh Norman, however, was given a penalty and a fine for the same action. 
Cooks says his bow-and-arrow move is inspired by the Bible.
Players Are Frustrated
"I've been doing it for three years now, and there was never a complaint about it," Cooks told a New Orleans newspaper. "Now, all of a sudden, there is." He added that it's frustrating that the league wants to take away something that means so much to him, and that has nothing to do with fighting. 
Some penalties have had a big effect on the outcome of games. The Eagles returned the kickoff for a touchdown after Washington was pushed 15 yards back by Davis' celebration penalty.
Davis, who threw the football over the goal post in a jump shot, was asked whether he thought what he did should be a penalty.
"I don't think so," he said. "But like I said, it's out of my control."
Celebration Rules Are Confusing
Washington Coach Jay Gruden had shown his players video clips of types of celebrations the league did not allow. However, the jump shot wasn't covered, Davis said.
Other actions such as dunking the football over the goal post were mentioned, Davis said. "But I think he forgot to mention that if you shoot it, you get a penalty. When I left that meeting, I was scratching my head. I was like, 'Maybe I should ask him about the shooting, too.' But now I get it. I get the point. That will never, ever happen again. Ever."
Davis added, "They set the rules." In the end, it's up to players to follow them, he said.
      
      