NEW YORK, N.Y. — Lady Gaga will perform at the Super Bowl halftime show. The stage might look a lot different from past performances.
Reports say the singer could perform from the roof of the stadium.
If it happens, she won't be the only one trying to get attention this year.
Companies are working on big stunts to pull during the championship football game. One will even shoot its commercial during the game. 
The Atlanta Falcons will take on the New England Patriots in Super Bowl LI (51). It's expected to be the biggest live TV event of the year.
Companies Want To Have The Most Popular TV Commercials
Every year, more than 30 companies compete to have the most popular commercials during the Super Bowl. They stuff their ads with star actors, silly humor, and cute animals. 
More than 110 million people are expected to watch the Super Bowl on Feb. 5. 
Companies want to be remembered. But it's not easy. 
Many of these advertisements, also known as ads, get released before the game. And the ads cost a lot of money—companies must pay $5 million to show just a 30-second commercial. With just days left until the game, companies need to move fast to finish their ads.
Commercials This Year Will Be Wackier
This year, they are turning to wacky stunts.
"It used to be, 'We need a Super Bowl spot,'" said Mark DiMassimo, who leads an advertising company in New York. Advertising companies help make commercials. "Now, it's we need a Super Bowl stunt or event. It needs to be newsworthy, social and surprising."
Snickers said it will show a live Super Bowl ad in the third quarter starring Adam Driver, who acted in "Star Wars: The Force Awakens."
The Super Bowl ad is just part of a bigger plan, said Allison Miazga-Bedrick, who works in advertising for Snickers. She promises more than 30 hours of video before the Super Bowl.
Then there's Wix, the Internet company. It showed clips of its Super Bowl commercial on Facebook and YouTube on January 17. The clips starred English actor Jason Statham and Israeli actress Gal Gadot.
One Company's Ad Was Rejected
84 Lumber is a building supply company. The company made a commercial but it said that Fox TV wouldn't allow it. Fox will broadcast the Super Bowl. The Pennsylvania company bought a 90-second ad during the game. This is a huge commitment for such a small company. 
Amy Smiley works in advertising for 84 Lumber. She said the company's first ad was rejected because it showed a border wall. This sounded too much like words about the Mexican border from President Donald Trump. He wants to build a wall at the Mexican border to keep people from entering the United States without permission.
Fox did not comment on the ad. This helped get even more attention for 84 Lumber.
Hyundai, the car company, is also taking a big risk for an ad. It is teaming with movie director Peter Berg, who will film a 90-second ad while the Super Bowl is happening. Hyundai said the ad will show "off-the-field" moments from the game. The commercial will air right after the game ends.
Ads During The Game Get More Viewers
Many ads are shown before or after the Super Bowl itself. They aren't as popular as the commercials shown during the game. But Hyundai's new idea could interest people.
"The challenge for all of these companies is, 'How do you stand out?' " said Tim Calkins. He's a professor in advertising at Northwestern University. "We're going to see this year people try some very curious approaches," he says.
Dean Evans works in advertising with Hyundai. He said the company is trying to get people to talk about them.
"We wanted to test ourselves," Evans said. He wanted to show people something new and different, he said.
      
      