When Maria Cerpa was in high school, she skipped several weeks of school every year to visit Mexico. She and her family saw relatives and celebrated religious feasts around Christmas.
In December, Cerpa planned a similar trip for her own family. However, she brought her own two children back home by the time school started after winter break.
“I think it’s really important that they know where their roots come from," Cerpa said. "They need to appreciate what my parents went through in order for us to be here."
She added that it is also important for children to be in school. “I want them to be prepared when they go to college and to be able to handle the classes.”
Teaching The Importance Of Attendance
January used to be a hard month for teachers in the Chicago, Illinois, area. They had to get Hispanic students caught up with their schoolwork after trips that could last a month or more. School officials tried different approaches to keep students in school. They tried educating parents about the importance of attendance. They also threatened to fail students who took the extra time off.
This winter, however, only a few students at Community High School in west Chicago asked to take the extra time off. Five years ago, more than 1 out of every 10 took extended vacations, said Antonio del Real. He is an official at the school. Other school districts with many Hispanic students have seen the same thing.
“For us as a school and administrators, it’s great that they can be here and not miss so much,” said del Real. He noted it helps make sure that students can keep up with schoolwork and graduate on time. “We still have students leave, but not for long periods of time.”
Families gave different explanations for ending extended vacations. Perhaps the biggest reason, though, is that many of today’s Hispanic parents grew up in the United States. They know it is important not to miss school.
Students Who Are Now Parents
“I’m seeing my former students bring their kids here as students,” said Eileen Considine. She is the principal at Columbia Explorers Academy in Chicago. This year, fewer than 1 out of every 100 families took extended winter breaks. It used to be as much as 15 out of every 100 families. “My parents are very respectful and they understand that it’s very important for their kids to be in school.”
At Waukegan Public Schools, also in Illinois, officials began asking parents to sign a document four years ago. It says that if their children were absent for more than 10 days in a row, they could be dropped from school. Then the parents would have to sign them up again, said Vanessa Campos. She is an official with Waukegan Public School District 60.
As a result, far fewer students there take long breaks.
Jose Lara is a former principal at Clearview Elementary School. It is also in Waukegan.
“It’s important that every kid has a chance to show what he or she has learned,” Lara said. “If they’re not at school, nobody can help them.”
Bringing Old Culture To New Country
Maria de los Angeles Torres is the head of the Inter-University Program for Latino Research. The group is made up of university programs that study Latinos. She said the change shows something important about immigrant communities. They are able to adopt the values of the United States without giving up their own culture. 
Jasmine Martinez is a mother of two. She has fond memories of visiting Mexico with her parents each winter. The family would take up to four weeks off to drive across the border and enjoy Christmas.
Next winter, Martinez will take her two daughters to Mexico. She said she already knows the family will not be gone longer than winter break.
“I wouldn’t want them to miss and be that far behind when they come back,” she said.
      
      