Author JK Rowling's Harry Potter series tells the story of a young orphan who discovers that he has magical abilities. In addition to typical problems faced by children and teenagers, he faces the less common challenge of battling an evil wizard set on taking over the magical world.
Popular among both children and adults, the Harry Potter books may be much more than just entertaining reading material. New research suggests that reading Rowling’s books can potentially make us nicer people.
With more than 450 million copies sold, the Harry Potter novels are some of the best- selling books of all time. However, not everyone is a fan of the series. Various Christian groups have claimed that the books promote witchcraft to children. Washington Post book critic Ron Charles argued that the series is too simple and childish for adult readers, in part because of its "good vs. evil" premise. Others criticized Hogwarts, the wizardry academy that Harry attends, for rewarding inborn talents rather than hard work. Writer Christopher Hitchens, on the other hand, praised Rowling for moving away from the "dreams of wealth and class and snobbery" found in some English children's literature and instead, creating "a world of youthful democracy and diversity.” A growing body of evidence suggests that the pro-Harry camp might be on to something. Reading Rowling’s work, at least as a youth, might be a good thing.
Interaction Improves Attitudes
For decades, researchers have argued that negative attitudes and prejudices between different groups of people can be improved through intergroup contact. Intergroup contact occurs when an in-group, or a social group which someone identifies with, comes into contact with an out-group, or a group someone doesn't identify with or perceives as threatening. Even reading short stories about friendship between in- and out-group characters is enough to improve children's attitudes toward out-groups.
A new study published in the Journal of Applied Social Psychology found that reading the Harry Potter books in particular has similar effects. In the books, Harry is frequently in contact with groups that are mistreated by others. Muggles, people who have no magical abilities, get no respect in the wizarding world. Wizards and witches descended from only one magical parent don’t fare much better. Harry's enemy in the series, the evil wizard Lord Voldemort, believes that power should only be held by “pure-blood” wizards. He seeks to rid the world of people who do not meet his standards of purity.
The research group that published the study was led by professor Loris Vezzali of the University of Modena and Reggio Emilia in Italy. The group conducted three related studies. In the first, 34 elementary schoolchildren were given a questionnaire assessing their attitudes toward immigrants, a group frequently viewed with prejudice in Italy. The children were then divided into two groups that met once a week for six weeks. Both groups read Harry Potter passages and discussed them with a research assistant. One group read passages relating to prejudice, such as a scene in which Draco Malfoy, a pure-blood wizard, insults Harry's friend Hermione because of her Muggle ancestry. The control group read passages unrelated to prejudice, including the scene in which Harry buys his first magic wand.
More Positive Responses
A week after the last session, the researchers assessed the children’s attitudes toward out-groups again. The researchers found that children who identified with the Harry Potter character and had read passages dealing with prejudice, viewed immigrants more positively than they had before. The attitudes of those who had read neutral passages had not changed.
Vezzali and his fellow researchers conducted two follow-up studies with similar results. One found that reading Harry Potter improved Italian high school students' attitudes toward gay people. The other linked the books with kinder attitudes toward refugees among English university students. Identification with the Potter character did not contribute to attitude changes in this older population. That is likely because college kids don’t identify as much with the younger character. However, strongly not identifying with the evil Voldemort did contribute to attitude shifts.  
As the researchers write: “People form attitudes not only by conforming to positive relevant others but also by distancing themselves from negative relevant others.”
Making A Case For Novels
The study supports earlier research suggesting that reading novels as a child can have a positive impact on someone's personality and social skills. A study published last year in the journal Science found that reading fiction can help people to better understand and relate to others. Books with strong themes and characters appear to help readers think about points of view that they might otherwise not consider.
Vezzali says that fantasy books might be especially helpful in improving negative attitudes. Fantasy books are often about groups of people or beings that do not exist in the real world. Readers are therefore able to think about prejudice and conflicting viewpoints without being distracted by real-world biases.
“Unfortunately, the news we read on a daily basis tells us we have so much work to do!” Vezzali said. “But based on our work, fantasy books such as Harry Potter may be of great help to educators and parents in teaching tolerance.” Vezzali’s research group plans to continue studying how literature shapes people's attitudes in the hope of one day having a real cultural impact.
For the moment, universal acceptance and international peace seem unlikely. But perhaps a trip to the bookstore — or a few clicks on the Internet — might be a good place to start.
      
      