AUSTIN, Texas — A new state law in Texas will change the gun rules at the University of Texas. Concealed handguns will now be allowed in classrooms, but not in dorm rooms. The school's president reluctantly approved the new school rules last week.
The University of Texas (UT) is in Austin, a liberal town. Liberals believe the government can protect people, and think more guns leads to more crime. Most liberals are against allowing guns in public places.
Like many who live in Austin, UT President Greg Fenves opposes allowing guns at the school.
Second Amendment Claims
The Republican-dominated Texas state government voted last year to force public universities to allow gun license holders to bring their weapons to school. Republicans are conservative. Many conservatives think that more guns in the hands of responsible citizens means less crime. They want guns to be allowed in public places.
Unless it is challenged, the new law goes into effect Aug. 1.
Gun-rights activists insist the right to have weapons on campus falls under the Second Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. They say the campus law is necessary for self-defense.
However, the so-called "campus carry" measure has met with strong resistance from students, teachers and university officials. One well-known opponent is University of Texas System Chancellor William McRaven. He is the former head of U.S. Special Operations Command. He directed the raid that killed Osama Bin Laden, the mastermind of the Sept. 11, 2001, terror attacks on the United States.
Fenves and McRaven do not agree with the new law. Fenves wrote a letter to McRaven that read: "The presence of handguns at an institution of higher learning is contrary to our mission of education and research."
Notebook, Pens, Laptop, Gun
Texas' laws allow private universities, which do not accept government money, to keep weapons off their campuses. Fenves said that most have decided not to allow weapons at school. They include the largest and most powerful private schools in Texas, such as Baylor, Rice, Southern Methodist and Texas Christian universities.
State lawmakers allowed public universities to have some gun-free areas on campus. However, they cannot keep guns away from school entirely. Fenves said not allowing any guns in classrooms would violate the law.
In most cases, a person must be 21 years old to get a gun license in Texas. Many students are younger than 21, so they cannot carry guns even with the new law. While licensed students will be allowed to bring their handguns to class, they will not be able to do so openly. A separate law that allows the open-carry of handguns does not apply to colleges.
Top Students, Teachers May Stay Away
Those who do not like the law say that allowing guns on campus will make it more difficult for schools to attract the best students and teachers. Gun-Free UT is a group of students, teachers and school workers who oppose the new rules. The group has said allowing guns in classrooms will create a threatening atmosphere and hurt free speech. Nobel Prize-winning scientist Steven Weinberg is a professor at UT. He said that his class will not be open to students carrying guns.
The rules were criticized by gun-rights groups as well. Students for Concealed Carry do not agree with all of the rules. At UT, teachers' offices can be gun-free, and semi-automatic weapons cannot have a bullet in the chamber. The group disagrees with those limitations.
Sporting Events Still Gun-Free
Laboratories will also remain gun-free, as will areas or events where younger children will be. State law still prohibits weapons at sporting events.
Guns will generally not be allowed in dorm rooms. However, they will be allowed in common areas of dorms, including dining rooms and study areas.
Family members who are licensed to carry can keep their weapons when visiting students. University staff members with gun-carry licenses may also hold onto their weapons if they enter a dorm.
The rules now go to the University of Texas for review. If no changes are made within 90 days, the rules will become final.
      
      