Christian leaders have expressed horror at the massacre of more than 70 people in a bombing in Lahore, Pakistan, on Easter Sunday. The attack occurred on the most significant day in the church calendar.
The Vatican said Pope Francis was praying for the victims and their families. At the headquarters of the Catholic Church in Rome, Italy, officials said the attack “casts a shadow of sadness and anguish" on the Easter season.
Father Federico Lombardi, the pope’s spokesman, said: “Once again cowardly, murderous hatred rages on the most defenseless.” Christian minorities had been struck by “fanatical violence,” he added.
"Evil Knows No Bounds"
Justin Welby, the archbishop of Canterbury and leader of the worldwide Anglican church, tweeted: “We pray for the victims of Lahore to the crucified God, who brings hope in despair, whose love is with the victims, who promises justice.”
The archbishop of Westminster, Vincent Nichols, who is the Catholic leader in England and Wales, said: “Evil knows no bounds. It sinks to a new low of hatred in deliberately targeting women and children celebrating their Easter Day in peace."
Nichols said the attack "is utterly contemptible and condemned, just as we fervently pray for those who have died and been wounded.”
Taliban Group Claims Responsibility
The Taliban group Jamaat ul-Ahrar claimed responsibility for the bombing. “We carried out the Lahore attack, as Christians are our target,” said spokesman Ehansullah Ehsan. The violent group of Islamic extremists has been fighting the government for control and holds power in some parts of Pakistan.
A year ago, Jamaat ul-Ahrar carried out a bombing at a Roman Catholic church in Lahore. A total of 15 people were killed and 70 injured.
Christians and other religious minorities have often come under attack in Pakistan over the past decade. Many Christians say the government has done little to improve their security.
Risk High For Christians In Pakistan
Pakistan is sixth on a list of countries in which Christians are most at risk. The list was put together by Open Doors, a Christian organization that monitors global persecution. The top five are North Korea, Iraq, Eritrea, Afghanistan and Syria.
The country has extremely harsh blasphemy laws. Criticizing the Muslim prophet Muhammad is punishable by death or life imprisonment. The law is often used to settle personal arguments, particularly against religious minorities such as Christians.
According to Open Doors, “The country’s 3.8 million Christians feel increasingly under threat in their daily lives. The persecution of religious minorities is in effect enabled rather than deterred by the state.”
Aid to the Church in Need (ACN), a Catholic organization, lists Pakistan in its “high persecution” category. It says the situation for the Christian minority has become significantly worse between 2012 and 2014.
Government Urged To Tighten Security
John Pontifex of ACN called it a sickening "attack on the most innocent and vulnerable people in society, enjoying their Easter festivities. What we are now seeing is a worrying trend of serious attacks on Christians clearly aimed at driving them away from their homelands by violent means.”
Pontifex said that Pakistani government must tighten security and tackle extremism. Otherwise, “Pakistan will soon be added to the list of countries at risk of a genocidal threat against Christians and other minorities,” he added. Genocide is when members of an ethnic group or religion are targeted for death.
The Pew Research Center says Pakistan is among the countries with the highest levels of hostility to religious minorities.
Pope Calls For "Weapons Of Love"
David Alton, a British crossbench, or nonpartisan, peer in the House of Lords and a campaigner against religious persecution, said he had launched a report in Parliament. The lawmaker said the report  “catalogs the systematic campaign targeting Pakistan’s religious minorities, particularly Christians and Ahmadis."
In his Easter message, Pope Francis spoke of the “blind and brutal form of violence which continues to shed blood in different parts of the world." He spoke under tight security in St. Peter’s Square in Rome hours before the Lahore attack.
The pope mentioned attacks in Belguim, Turkey, Nigeria, Chad, Cameroon, Ivory Coast and Iraq.
He urged people to use the “weapons of love” to defeat “the evil that seems to have the upper hand in the life of so many people.”
Who Are Pakistan’s Christians?
There are 3.8 million Christians among the Pakistani population of 192 million – less than 2 percent. The vast majority of the population is Muslim, with Hindus the biggest religious minority.
Most Christians live in or near the southern city of Karachi. Many are poor, although there are some rich Christian families in Karachi.
Pakistan’s strict blasphemy law has often led to Christians being targeted.
The best-known is Asia Bibi, a Christian woman from a Punjab village who was accused of blasphemy in 2010 after an argument with some Muslim women. The governor of Punjab, Salman Taseer, said she had been falsely accused and he was later killed by his bodyguard, Mumtaz Qadri, a Muslim. Qadri was found guilty of murder and executed. More than 100,000 people attended his funeral earlier this month.
Organizations that monitor religious persecution around the world say the situation in Pakistan is getting worse. The government must do more to protect the Christian minority, they say.
      
      