BEIRUT, Lebanon — United Nations (U.N.) Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon called on Thursday for an immediate investigation of an attack on a school in Syria's Idlib Province. A civil war between Syria's army and opposition groups who are fighting the Syrian government has raged in the country for six years. The U.N.'s children's agency is calling the attack one of the deadliest of its kind in the war.
UNICEF raised the death toll in Wednesday's attack to 28, among them 22 children and six teachers.
Ban said in a statement that the attack, carried out against territory held by the opposition, may amount to a war crime if found to be deliberate and those who committed the attack must be held accountable.
Russia Blamed For The Attack
Witnesses said overhead jets targeted the school as many as 10 times around midday Wednesday. Opposition activists blamed the airstrikes on Russian and government planes.
Idlib is the main Syrian opposition stronghold, though other groups also have a large presence there. It has regularly been hit by Syrian and Russian warplanes, as well as the U.S.-led coalition targeting Islamic State fighters. The Islamic State is an extremist group attempting to set up its own country governed by Islamic law. The Islamic State is separate from both the opposition groups and the Syrian government.
The Russian military denied responsibility, calling the accusations a "sham."
Russian Defense Ministry Spokesman Major General Igor Konashenkov said a Russian drone flew over the school building on Thursday and found its roof intact and no bomb craters around it.
Russian warplanes didn't fly over the area the previous day, Konashenkov said.
A team of first responders, the Syrian Civil Defense, said on Thursday that the airstrikes killed at least 35 people, mostly children.
The Britain-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said 15 students were killed, as well as four teachers and three other women. Divergent death tolls are not uncommon in a conflict-torn Syria that international media has been unable to access for over two years.
UNICEF and the Syrian Civil Defense said the death toll would likely rise as rescue efforts continue.
54 Syrian Schoolchildren Killed So Far This Year
Juliette Touma, regional UNICEF chief of communication, said Wednesday's attack was the deadliest attack on a school in 2016. It brings the overall number of children killed in such attacks in 2016 to 54.
According to Touma, 591 children were killed in 2015 in Syria.
Prior to Wednesday's attack, the deadliest assault on a school was reported in April 2014. Thirty children were killed in airstrikes that hit a school in the rebel-held part of Aleppo city, according to UNICEF.
UNICEF said it has verified at least 38 attacks on schools this year across Syria, whether in government-held areas or rebel-controlled territory, compared to 60 attacks last year. Touma said one out of every three schools is now unusable. Some are damaged or destroyed. Others are being used for military purposes or sheltering people who have lost their homes.
On Thursday, Syria's state TV said two students were killed and 13 others were wounded by weapons fired by rebel fighters at a school in the government-held western part of Aleppo.
Elsewhere, at least eight people were killed in government shelling of Douma, a rebel-held suburb east of the capital Damascus, according to the Syrian Civil Defense team and the Observatory. The first responders said that there was a child among the eight who died.
UNICEF says over 1.7 million Syrian children remain out of school in 2016. The staggering figure is a drop from 2014 when 2.1 million were recorded as not attending classes. The U.N. agency says another 1.3 million are at risk of dropping out this year. In the rebel-held part of Aleppo, teachers and volunteers have set up underground schools to ensure some classes continue.
Putin Continues To Support Syrian Government
Russian President Vladimir Putin, meanwhile, defended his support for the Syrian army's takeover of the opposition-held eastern districts of the city of Aleppo. He said it is necessary to crush the fighters there.
Putin said the choice was between "keeping a terrorist nest there or crushing that nest while minimizing civilian casualties."
Russia's airstrikes in support of the Syrian government troops' offensive on Aleppo has drawn international outrage. Moscow has denied striking civilians and has blamed the United States for failing to persuade the U.S.-backed rebels in the city to cut their ties with fighters from al-Qaida's branch. Al-Qaida is another terrorist group that was founded by Osama bin Laden.
Putin ignored calls to end the attacks on Aleppo, saying the U.S.-backed offensive on Islamic State-held Mosul in Iraq would have to be halted under the same logic.
Airstrikes by Russian and Syrian government planes on Aleppo have been halted for nine days now, in expectation of evacuations, but efforts have failed because Syrian rebels say there have been no safety guarantees for the evacuees. The rebels also say Russia and the government are not allowing aid into the eastern rebel-held districts of Aleppo that are home to some 275,000 people.
A government ground offensive attempting to push into the rebel-held part of the city and airstrikes in rural Aleppo have continued.
U.N. official Jan Egeland said efforts would be renewed to secure the evacuation of nearly 200 wounded from eastern Aleppo districts. They will also try to allow medical and food supplies into the attacked part of the city.
He said the Syrian government had denied humanitarian access to eastern Aleppo as part of a monthly U.N. plan to access 25 attacked and remote areas in Syria.
"We need to overturn that decision because east Aleppo needs humanitarian supplies, they need it urgently," Egeland said. "If not ... it will be the worst winter in now the six winters we have had in the conflict."
      
      