The electricity from the Lodge Farm in north Wales is generated from the waste of 300 brown cattle, chicken manure and waste from the local Kellogg’s food factory. This sloppy mixture is as good as it gets, says farmer Richard Tomlinson.
Since 2011, the gas from Lodge Farm has generated more than 4.5 million kilowatt hours of electricity and heat for the farmhouse. The farm uses a process to turn waste into forms of energy. It also powers an on-site engineering factory and 80 to 100 homes. The farm is organic, meaning it does not use farm chemicals, only natural matter.
“But I am not turning the farm into a rural power station. My job is to grow food,” says Tomlinson. He co-founded one of the United Kingdom's largest organic milk cooperatives. A cooperative, or co-op, is an organization owned and operated by members who also share the profits.
Helping To Protect The Environment
Generating power from farm and food waste not only makes money but is good for the environment, he says. The United Kingdom produces nearly 110 million tons of natural waste a year. About 90 million tons of that come from farms. In addition, the U.K. produces about 10 million tons of food waste, much of which still goes into landfills.
“Combining the two waste streams to produce heat, electricity and fertilizer closes the loop," says Tomlinson. He explains it doesn’t make sense for the waste to be dumped in a landfill because it can be changed into energy. Tomlinson and his brother designed and built eight other plants to change farm waste into energy.
However, many of the U.K.'s 208 plants that depend on food waste to make energy also take farmland out of production. The waste could be fed to people or animals.
Because farm waste is less efficient as a fuel than other crops, many farmers have turned their fields to maize to use to make energy. The National Farmers Union (NFU) estimates about 15,000 hectares (about 37,000 acres) have been turned to grow maize (corn) for energy.
Landfill Fees Are A Waste
The food waste crisis in the U.K. costs businesses a lot of money every year in processing and landfill fees. And it is mostly avoidable.
Converting farm waste into energy "is the best option for anything that cannot be used to feed animals or people,” says Tristram Stuart. He set up the food waste campaign group Feedback. But sending food waste to a plant to turn it into energy only recovers a small amount of the energy that went into growing the food in the first place.
Stuart would like to see all food waste not fit for humans fed to animals. “Pigs eat our waste, we eat pigs: It’s a virtuous circle,” he says.
Scotland Outpacing England
More farm waste is likely to be made into energy in the future because of government support and more food waste being available for new plants. The fastest growth has been in Scotland, where 27 projects are now running. Forty-three more have planning approval, and 12 more are seeking approval.
England, though, lags behind in separating food from other waste, and the U.K. government is considering whether to cut all its electricity generation payments from future plants that have a capacity over 500 megawatts. The result, says this young industry, could be less food waste being saved for energy.
“We throw a shocking amount of food waste into landfill because we have not collected it and treated it separately," says Fergus Healy. He is a director at the energy company Olleco. "The collection of food waste can play a significant part in helping the U.K. achieve its (50 percent) 2020 recycling targets.”
      
      