Australia has a new weapon against feral cats. It looks like a big box, but it is a robot. When a wild cat gets close to it, the machine sprays poison. When the cats lick the poison off their fur, they will die. 
Cats are not native to Australia. There used to be no cats in Australia. Then European settlers brought cats to the island country as pets. This was bad for many Australian animals. The native animals did not know how to protect themselves from cats.
Over time, many pet cats got loose. They began to live in the wild. Cats that live in the wild are called feral cats. They are a big problem. Feral cats hunt many of Australia’s endangered animals. Some of these endangered animals are almost all gone. 
John Read is an Australian scientist. He studies how animals relate to the world around them. He has made four robotic “grooming traps” to stop feral cats.
Cats' Weakness: They Like To Be Clean
Feral cats have one weakness. Cats groom themselves carefully. They lick off almost anything that gets on their fur. They like to be clean. Read knows this. He created his robotic traps to use the cats' cleanliness against them. 
The grooming trap is about the same size as a cat. It has four sensors. It uses these sensors to know when something moves in front of it. The sensors use lasers to decide if a moving object is a cat or something else.
The lasers measure the size of a moving object. Very big or very small objects are not cats. However, something that is the same size as the trap is probably a cat. That tells the trap to spray poison.
Rare Night Parrots Are In Danger
The trap works because cats lick the poison off their fur. They want to be clean. After they lick the poison, they die. 
The first grooming trap was set up earlier this month. It is in the Pullen Pullen nature reserve. Pullen Pullen is a reserve that protects a small Australian bird called the night parrot. It is endangered. The reserve is a place that keeps the night parrot safe. 
Rob Murphy helps to run Pullen Pullen. He said John Read's grooming traps are important.
Murphy said the night parrot "could be lost forever" if it is not protected. Read's traps will poison the feral cats that hunt the birds. This will protect the night parrots.
      
      