A "zombie witch" in a dirty white dress chases people down a street in Australia. 
Welcome to "Zedtown," where competitors pretend that the world is being taken over by zombies. They race to reach an escape point in order to win. They must also avoid being caught and turned by the "undead."
"Zedtown" has been described as a giant game of zombie-themed tag or a "live-action" video game. The game takes advantage of the growing number of people who grew up battling animated enemies on computer screens. Now, these people want to experience such imaginary adventures in real life.
She Enjoys People Running From Her
Katerina Halkeas, who plays the witch, loves having people run away from her in real fear. She bases her character on a video game character. "Video games themselves are becoming so much more immersive. And then when you have something like this, it's really the next step," adds Halkeas. 
Unlike computer games, though, in real life players cannot hit pause or pull the plug. They cannot even use the bathroom without risking their "lives." They have to keep running to escape dangers in the game. It adds to the heightened energy. 
The event kicks off with humans outnumbering zombies. If the humans are touched by a zombie, then they also become zombies. 
Both sides are dressed in costumes. The organizers add danger at the start of the game by making a small group, who appear to be human, secret zombies. This, players say, creates fear and quickly swells the number of those hunting against those being hunted.
Forming New Relationships
"You find yourself talking to people you wouldn't have otherwise spoken to and relying on those people for your life and you form intense relationships quickly," says "Zedtown" creator David Harmon. He has plans to roll out the event in other cities.
Tasks and challenges are set for people to move through the event space. They also try to make sure people do not just hide. 
Ian Kilburn, a player dressed as "Death," wearing a cloak and carrying a sickle, says the game is a great rush. Everyone works hard on their costumes and tries to have fun. 
The demand to play is very high. Tickets for an event at the University of New South Wales, which cost Aus $45 (U.S. $34) each, sold out within minutes.
Shooting games like laser tag have been around for a long time. "Zedtown," however, is part of a series of new games blending old video game ideas with the real world. 
One example is "Pokemon Go." The game is based on old software from 1996. It uses players' smartphone cameras and maps to let them see cartoon monsters and capture them in real-world settings.
Video Games Inspire Real-Life Adventures
Video games where players have to solve riddles and puzzles to reach the next level have inspired real-life adventures. "Escape the Room" is one example. Participants are locked in a room and have to solve problems to get out.
The next generation of games, though, will blend video games with the real world. The players will be running around with headsets showing them images of imaginary enemies. Such games are called virtual reality systems. 
Tim Ruse is in charge of the startup "Zero Latency," a virtual reality game. In "Zero Latency," competitors wear headsets and carry backpacks with a computer. They also carry fake guns. The competitors enter a large warehouse and explore different imaginary settings. These include battling zombies and an arcade-style game where you defend a fort.
"Zero Latency" Takes Off
"Zero Latency" started just over a year ago in Melbourne, Australia. Now, the founders are expanding their model all over the world. 
Ruse says humans have always tried to remove themselves from the real world. He adds that he thinks the new immersive video games would become the next level of entertainment.
      
      