It is an hour before dawn. On the mountain slopes below Barkobot village in Nepal, a small crowd of women is already lining up. They will need to fill up their water pots from a single plastic hose, and it will be a long wait.
After the massive earthquake that struck Nepal on April 25 last year, the main water source in the village dried up. Since then, people have had to rely on a narrow pipe for water, but all that comes out is a thin trickle. It takes almost an hour to fill a 20-liter (5-gallon) pot.
While they wait, the women joke about their situation. “We’ll soon have to walk all the way down to the river in the valley to get water. It’s so far we might as well have a picnic while we’re there,” says one. The others laugh, but after a pause they become more serious. “It would have been better if I had died in the earthquake,” says Maiya Giri, a mother of three. “I hope another one comes and kills me so I won’t have to face these problems.”
Nine months after the earthquake, not a single home has been rebuilt in Barkobot. Almost everyone is living in tin shacks, just as they are in other areas struck by the earthquake. It destroyed an estimated 500,000 homes and killed 9,000 people.
Delayed By A Blockade
In the past four months life has grown even more difficult. Groups opposed to Nepal's new constitution have blocked Nepal’s border crossings with India. That caused severe shortages of fuel, gas and other essential supplies. The blockade was called off last weekend, but it will be weeks before things return to normal.
Survivors now face a bitterly cold winter, the lack of supplies and a delayed effort to rebuild.
It has been only recently that Nepal’s National Reconstruction Authority (NRA) was established. It is responsible for distributing $4.1 billion to rebuild the country. Most construction is unlikely to begin for months.
“The NRA understands how serious the concerns of people are,” says Sushil Gyewali, its CEO. The first priority will be to get money for people to fix their homes.
Surviving — But Barely
Gyewali’s words will come as little comfort to Sita Giri. Like everyone else, she is struggling with the water shortage, but she has other problems too. When the earthquake struck, Sita, who was four months pregnant, was indoors with her husband, Ram Krishna. The house fell on them before they could get outside. Their neighbors managed to pull them out of the rubble, but Ram Krishna is paralyzed below the waist.
Ram Krishna now spends most of his time lying in bed in their tiny tin hut. He can reach out to rock his baby son’s crib, but do little else. A wheelchair stands in the corner, but the path from his hut to the road is steep and rocky.
“For me it’s difficult. I have a small child and a sick person to look after,” says Sita, cradling her 4-month-old son, Avash. “The cold season is unbearable. It’s really tough with a small child.”
Soon after the earthquake, the government promised 200,000 rupees (nearly $3,000) to each family who had lost their home. Like most, Sita and her husband have only received 25,000 rupees ($365) so far.
Prices Too High To Pay
The promised money has led many people to put off rebuilding their homes. Even those who want to begin have been discouraged by the lack of water and the rise in the cost of building materials due to the blockade.
“They are selling cooking gas for 7,000 rupees (about $102) because of the blockade (more than 4.5 times the usual price). The government gets everything – gas, petrol – but we are left with nothing,” says Hare Bahadur Bharati. He is another village resident.
The United Nations' World Food Program (WFP) says it has distributed much less emergency food and money than expected because of the blockade. Many of supplies have been stuck in India for months. “For people whose homes have been destroyed by the earthquake and are living in temporary shelters, life has been extremely difficult,” says a WFP spokesperson.
Rebuilding all of Nepal’s shattered homes seems a long way off. The NRA estimates Nepal will need at least an additional $3 billion. In the meantime, Sita and the residents of Barkobot have little choice but to struggle on. “Instead of planning for the future,” she says, “we are only thinking about how to survive today.”
      
      