About 20 years ago, scientists discovered that rats love to be tickled.
Now, a new study shows more about what is really going on in their little brains.
Scientists Examined Rats' Brains
Scientists at Humboldt University of Berlin tickled and played with rats. The university is in Germany. They found an area of the rat brain that could be important for how rats react. But there's a catch. The  brain region was turned on during tickling and play in happy rats. However, it did not react to tickling or play in anxious rats.
Perhaps most importantly, when scientists turned on this brain area, rats immediately began giggling. They made the same sound during tickling and play. These sounds are above the range of human hearing, which is why you've never heard a mouse giggle.
Few animals respond to tickling. Scientists once thought that only intelligent, social species such as humans and other primates laughed when they were tickled. However, in 1999, scientists showed that young rats giggle when they are tickled and when they play.
Scientists Shimpei Ishiyama and Michael Brecht were in charge of the new study. They decided to take a closer look at how rat brains respond to fun activities like tickling and playing. They looked at the somatosensory cortex. It is a large brain region that responds to information from the body about touch, pain, temperature and pressure. It has different areas that connect to different body parts.
Rats Giggled When They Were Tickled
The scientists worked with young male rats, which are the most ticklish. First, they wanted to make sure that rats really do like being tickled. They started tickling the rats, said Ishiyama. He calls himself a “professional rat tickler” and says it's the best job ever.
The rats made giggling noises when they were tickled on their stomachs and backs. The scientists recorded the giggles with a special microphone. They also observed that the rats liked it so much they began looking for a tickle. The animals played around in their cages, making “joy jumps."
However, then the scientists made the rats anxious. They placed the rats on high, open platforms under bright lights. The rats no longer giggled when they were tickled.
Next, the researchers looked at special brain cells. They are in an area that responds when the rat's stomach and back are touched. The scientists found that during tickling, these cells light up in happy rats. The cells did not do much when the rat were anxious.
Rats Responded To Both Playing And Tickling
This brain region also lit up while rats played with a friendly hand by chasing it around the cage. Scientists were especially surprised at this. That area of the brain is involved in touch, but no one was touching the rats. Brecht says there might be a link between tickling and play in the brain. “Maybe tickling is a trick of the brain to make animals interact with each other," he said.
Other scientists are excited about the discovery. Diana Roccaro and Elise Wattendorf are neuroscientists at the University of Fribourg in Switzerland. Neuroscientists study the brain. They wrote that the study is important, because it shows that playing and tickling both involve the same brain area. Fausto Caruana is a neuroscientist at the University of Parma in Italy. He called the study “extraordinary.” He emphasizes that studying laughter in humans is very difficult. “It is extremely important to find animal models for laughter.”
But what does ticklishness in rats have to do with ticklishness in humans? The most interesting fact was one they didn’t include in the paper: Rats, like humans, aren’t ticklish on their hands. However, they are very ticklish on the bottoms of their feet, he says.
“It was one of those observations that really made me think that, hey, we're looking at the same thing.” Brecht said.
      
      