HOUSTON, Texas — Before Bretagne died, the dog received a special goodbye from her friends.
On Monday, Bretagne walked slowly toward the doctor's office. The golden retriever passed more than a dozen firefighters saluting her.  After the doctor put Bretagne to sleep, the firefighters wrapped her body in an American flag and carried her away, the Houston Chronicle newspaper said.
Firefighters Say Bretagne Was Part Of The Family
Bretagne was 16 years old. She helped people her whole life. Bretagne was the last known living dog that worked on the search and rescue team in New York City after the terror attacks on Sept. 11, 2001. Bretagne's owner, Denise Corliss, decided to put her down on Monday because she was very old. It was a hard choice for her to make.
The golden retriever was part of the Cy-Fair Volunteer Fire Department. A volunteer is someone who is not paid for their work. The firefighters she worked with said that Bretagne was more than just a pet. She was a hero and part of their family. "We will remember her fondly," they said.
Bretagne became famous last year when a dog treat delivery company threw a birthday party for her in New York City. Bretagne flew in an airplane. She stayed in a fancy hotel and had a birthday party good enough for humans. She even wore a party hat. Corliss said that Bretagne deserved the special day because she worked hard.
Corliss Wanted Bretagne To Be A Service Dog
Corliss and Bretagne became a team in 1999. Corliss brought the 8-week-old puppy home hoping that they could train to help police and firefighters during emergencies, she said.
Corliss said that she didn't know how "life-changing" it would be. "It took 20 to 30 hours a week to stay on top of training," she said.
In 2000, they were invited to be on the Texas Task Force 1, a group that rescues people in emergencies.
Bretagne was the first dog in the Cy-Fair Volunteer Fire Department's search and rescue team, the department said. As a search and rescue dog, she helped save people in Hurricane Katrina and Hurricane Rita.
Bretagne and Corliss' first job was in New York City. After the terror attacks on Sept. 11, 2001, they were sent to look for people in the rubble. Bretagne was just 2 years old, but she was ready to get to work, Corliss said.
Corliss said the job was difficult. "I was just so grateful to have a K9 partner that helped me get through it," she said.
One time, Bretagne walked up to a sad firefighter sitting on the ground, Corliss said. "She went right to that firefighter and laid down next to him and put her head on his lap."
Birthday Party In New York City
In her final years, Bretagne helped kids at a school. Last year, Corliss took the dog to meet George H.W. Bush, who used to be president of the United States. Bretagne was also up for a prize for brave dogs. 
Last year, they returned to New York City for Bretagne's birthday party.
Their hotel bed had a banner that said "Dog's Best Day." Bretagne ate a gourmet burger. There was a happy birthday sign for her in Times Square, a very famous spot in New York. Bretagne received a small silver bone. It was called a doggie key to the city.  A museum even put Bretagne's name on a special stone to honor her.
"I've had several dog partners," Corliss said. "But Bretagne is that one dog for me."
      
      