TAMA, Japan — Two years ago, Michiyuki Arano was unemployed, so he decided to take a lesson on how to be a mascot. He went to the Choko Group Mascot Actors' School near Tokyo, Japan. 
For his first lesson, he paid $60 to put on a pig suit and goof around. He instantly loved it.
"Once you have a different layer on, you become somebody else, not your normal self," said Arano, who is 35 years old. "You become a pig or a squirrel, and you see people react to you, and that makes you want to help them even more."
Attending Mascot School
The mascot school is run by Choko Ohira, who has been in the mascot business for almost 40 years. People come to her school for many different reasons. "Some people come to become professional, some come in for fun, for the stress relief," she said. 
Ohira, a former mascot, once played a popular television mouse-pirate called Porori. Now, at the school, she is "raising the next generation of mascots," she said. She teaches people how to move so that the character looks alive. She also drills into the students that they must never show any skin, because they do not want to give away the secret that there's a person inside the costume.
A Mascot For Everything
In Japan, it's hard to go anywhere without seeing a mascot. These cute and fluffy characters are designed to make people feel good in any situation. Waka-P, for example, is the mascot of a prison in the city of Wakayama. He has a huge, citrus-fruit head and wears a letter P, for prison. Waka-P gives out hugs and reminds people to aim for a society with no crime.
Toilet-kun can be found in the city of Yokohama, especially on November 10, which is known as Restroom Day in Japan. Toilet-kun is a lovable character with a toilet-seat lid for a face and a toilet bowl for a belly. He represents the city's waste recycling group.
Even Japan's Defense Ministry, the government agency that manages the military, has mascots. They are Prince Pickles and his girlfriend Princess Parsley.
Few towns and businesses in Japan are without mascots. The United States Embassy in Tokyo has one, too: an Alaskan jellybean called Tom. He is orange-flavored, but turns lemon when he is nervous. He promotes American culture and U.S.-Japan relations, and is often seen with Kumamon, the black and white bear who is currently the top Japanese mascot.
Wear Costumes For The Government
Having so many mascots may be costing Japan too much money. Last year, the Finance Ministry, the government agency that manages money, decided to cut the number of government mascots to decrease spending.
Researcher Masafumi Hagiwara estimates that there are about 4,000 local government-related mascots in Japan. He says that there are probably 6,000 more mascots at central government agencies, companies and other groups. 
Because there is so much demand for mascots, being a mascot is a realistic career choice in Japan. A person can earn about $100 a day as a character.
Unacceptable Unless You Put On An Animal Costume First
For example, 51-year-old Shinji Kumamoto has been making a living in a furry costume for the past eight years. "I really enjoy doing things like jumping up and down in the street," he said. "Things you can't do in regular life. I can come out of my shell."
Lots of mascots in Japan seem to feel the same way. "I enjoy doing something that I can't do normally," says Yuko Mara, a 19-year-old who started taking mascot lessons in January. 
Akihiko Inuyama, the author of a book about mascots, thinks some people enjoy being mascots because it gives them a way to escape ordinary life. 
"You can be detached from a society and become a different you," he says. "In normal life, you don't get admired by strangers, but when you put on a mascot costume, you are popular in an instant."
Inuyama also says that people react to mascots as they would to a pet. "Mascots shake hands with you and hug you," he said. "Their existence can make you feel accepted in society."
      
      