MILWAUKEE, Wis. — Lynn Ressel is working on Ginger, her motorcycle. She is getting the motorcycle ready for the next riding season. It is a kind of motorcycle called a Harley-Davidson. Ressel is decorating it with fake gemstones. She said, “I kind of have a bling party going on.” 
Ressel lives in Adell, Wisconsin. She began riding motorcycles five years ago, with her husband Dave. Ressel rode on the back of his motorcycle at first. Then she got her own. “I saw a bunch of women out there," she said, "and I really wanted to give it a go myself. Now, every corner you turn, every place you stop at, it seems like there are women riding.” 
Women are an important group of motorcycle riders. Harley-Davidson and other motorcycle makers are trying hard to sell their products to women. One out of every 7 motorcycle riders in the United States is a woman. A group that watches the motorcycle business said that is more than ever before. The group did a study on female motorcycle riders. 
Twice As Many Female Riders
Sarah Schilke works for another motorcycle manufacturer. She also heads up PowerLily, a group of women who work with motorcycles. Schilke said that the number of female owners doubled in the last 12 years.
The study said that younger women ride motorcycles more than older women. The average age for female motorcyclists is 39 years old. The average age for men is 10 years older than that. Almost half of female motorcyclists are married and have gone to school for many years.
Women also like to ride certain kinds of motorcycles. One in 3 said that they liked to ride cruisers. They are big, heavy motorcycles with low seats that do not tip over easily. Almost the same number of womenpreferred scooters, small motorcycles that are easy to ride in cities. More than half of women said that they would buy a new motorcycle, not a used one. Most said that they wanted to try the bike first. They also wanted motorcycles that do not use much gas.
Learning To Ride Before Hitting The Road
Women riders are safe drivers. Three in 5 take a motorcycle class. Just 3 in 7 men take a class. Anne Zube is the leader of a women’s motorcycle club called Stilettos on Steel. She said that women want to become great riders. Zube said, “Our mission is to empower women to ride safely and strongly and to be street smart."  
Many women are interested in more than just riding their motorcycles. The study said that about half of women motorcyclists like to work on their own bikes. 
Reone Gheen is in the Stilettos on Steel club. She has also been a nurse for 30 years. Gheen is leaving her nursing job to become a motorcycle repair person.
Gheen is 53 years old, and has been riding motorcycles since she was 12 years old. She admitted that it is late to be changing jobs. Gheen said, "But it’s something I want to do, and I am still young enough to do it." Her first bike was a scooter, and now she has a big Harley-Davidson cruiser.
      
      