Nyaru has been learning to go hungry between meals. On Tuesday the 8-year-old male orangutan will leave Perth Zoo in Australia for the Indonesian island of Sumatra. He will be released into the wild there.
Varying feeding times are intended to copy the changing times of natural fruit availability. It's one of the ways zookeepers have helped him to prepare.
The zoo’s primate leader, Holly Thompson, calls it “jungle school.”
Nyaru knows all of the parts of the jungle school program, Thompson said. He’ll go to the open orangutan area to get used to it. After that, he goes to the Bukit Tigapuluh park on Sumatra, she said.  
A Pretend Forest
Nyaru's studies include learning about life in trees in the zoo’s fake forest. It's a group of towers, nets, ropes and high platforms.
Puan and Teliti are two other orangutans at the zoo. They give Nyaru lessons in nest-making and socializing. Nyaru uses a fig tree to test his climbing and nest-building skills.
The zoo usually houses the apes separately. However, Nyaru's social hours have been increased so he will know how to react when he sees orangutans in the wild.
Susan Hunt is the zoo’s chief. She said Nyaru had been prepared for the wild since he was born.
They are proud to be the only zoo releasing Sumatran orangutans into the wild, she said.
Looking To The Future
The goal is for Nyaru to have a family and help to repopulate the jungle, she said.
He will be the third orangutan bred at the zoo to be released since 2006 as part of the program.
The program is a partnership between the Frankfurt Zoological Society in Germany and the Indonesian government. Its goal is to protect wild orangutans, tigers, rhino  and elephants.
A new survey found 14,613 Sumatran orangutans in the wild. It's a big increase from the 6,600 estimated in 2004. However, the survey’s writer said the difference was due to better ways of counting orangutans, not more surviving.
Wild Sumatran orangutans have lost their homes because of logging and destroyed rain forests. It has caused the wild population to drop drastically since 1900. Sumatran orangutans are critically endangered.
Time For School
At Bukit Tigapuluh, Nyaru will again be enrolled in jungle school.
He will climb trees and learn what kind of food is in the forest, Dr. Peter Pratje said. Pratje is the leader of the Orangutan Project at Bukit Tigapuluh. 
Nyaru slowly will adapt to the forest and leave the area when he decides to, said Pratje. "Where he wants to go our keepers will follow.”
Nyaru has a radio tag so keepers can track where he goes.
Off To The Park
A large area of Bukit Tigapuluh is protected as a national park. The program to bring back orangutans began in 2002.
More than 160 orangutans have been released since then. Most of those had been sold as pets. Seven out of 10 released orangutans stay alive, which the Frankfurt Zoological Society said is “excellent."
      
      