The rules for buying electronic cigarettes are about to change. Soon, no one younger than 18 will be allowed to buy e-cigs in the United States.
E-cigarettes can cause health problems. The nicotine in them is not harmless. Nicotine comes from the tobacco plant. Tobacco farms have many kids working on them. Even though there will be new e-cig rules, younger kids will still be allowed to work on tobacco farms.
More high school students these days are using e-cigarettes. In 2005, about 1 out of 100 teens said they smoked. By 2011, about 1 out of 8 high schoolers said they used them.
Nicotine is heated inside the e-cig and turned into vapor. Then users breathe the vapor. It is safer than breathing burning tobacco, but not safe enough, experts say.
Tobacco Leaves Are Dangerous
Sylvia Burwell is the secretary of Health and Human Services in the United States. Last week, she announced the new rules for e-cigarettes. Stores will not be able to sell them to kids. She said the new rules make sense to protect children from tobacco.
There needs to be more concern about tobacco farming. Working with tobacco leaves might cause nicotine poisoning. People can throw up, get headaches and become dizzy. Pesticides commonly are used in tobacco farming to kill bugs. Some of them can harm the brain. Yet 12-year-olds can work 50 or 60 hours a week on an American tobacco farm. They are not allowed to work during school. Otherwise, it is perfectly legal.
Sofia is a 17-year-old tobacco worker. She can be seen in the photo at top in a tobacco field in North Carolina. Sofia started working when she was 13. She said that only her mother taught her how to protect herself in the fields. Her bosses never told her anything about pesticides and how workers can protect themselves from them. "When I worked with my mom, she would take care of me, and she would like always make sure I was OK," Sofia said.
She added, "Our bosses don’t give us anything except for our checks. That’s it.”
Asking Obama But Getting Nowhere
Human Rights Watch is a group that looks out for human rights. It has talked about the dangers of children doing tobacco farming for years. The group has asked President Barack Obama for help. Children should not work directly with tobacco. So far, the government has done nothing about keeping children from working on U.S. tobacco farms.
Under the new e-cigarette rules, the makers must meet standards set by the government. They must place health warnings on packages. They must tell the government about any health problems they find.
"We’ve agreed for years that nicotine does not belong in the hands of children,” Burwell said.
In 90 days, e-cigs will no longer be sold to children. Most of the other rules will not begin for years. If the government can stop those e-cig sales, it can also stop children from working with poisonous tobacco plants.

Jo Becker is advocacy director of the Children's Rights Division of Human Rights Watch.

      
      