A recent forecast by the U.S. Energy Information Administration contains a stunning punchline: Natural gas is expected to bypass coal as the number 1 source of electricity in the United States this year. Gas will supply 33.4 percent of power, and coal will contribute 32 percent. The EIA made this projection in the March installment of its monthly report on energy prices, the Short-Term Energy Outlook.
“This would be the first time that natural gas has generated more power than coal on an annual basis,” the agency says. Natural gas beat out coal during several months in 2015, but beating it out for the year is far more meaningful.
The EIA is the government agency tasked with analyzing information about how we use energy and where we get it from. It released the following chart to show just how dramatically the way we get electricity has changed over the past 60 years. The current move away from coal is just one of many changes charted.
Still, it is fair to say this latest change has taken everyone by surprise.
NatGas Powered Ahead Of Schedule
Last year, the Environmental Protection Agency released its Clean Power Plan as part of its efforts to protect the environment. The Clean Power Plan was designed to reduce carbon pollution from America's power plants. As a result of this plan, natural gas was projected to supply 33 percent of America's electricity in the year 2030 with coal supplying only 27 percent. That natural-gas target has more or less already happened despite the Clean Power Plan not yet being implemented.
The reason for the dramatic rise in electricity from natural gas is the shale gas boom, which has dramatically driven down natural gas prices. Here is a figure from the EIA, showing what occurred.

The price of natural gas is shown in dollars per million British thermal units (BTUs), which is a way to measure the cost of energy. The cost of 1 million units of natural gas has been below $2 for much of this year. 
“The energy system tends to move really slow, with a lot of inertia, except when it doesn’t,” said Richard Newell, a former administrator of the EIA. And when it comes to the natural-gas boom unleashed by fracking, Newell said “that was a case when it really didn’t" move slowly at all.
Solar Power Taking Hold
Fracking is a method to remove natural gas from the shale rocks below the Earth's surface. It involves drilling into the earth and pumping high quantities of water and sand into the ground. The water and sand then force the natural gas to the surface where it is captured and ultimately used to generate electricity. 
The EIA also says that coal generation will decline 3 percent this year because coal plants are being retired. At the same time, electricity from renewable sources such as solar energy will continue to grow. In fact, 2016 is expected to be a record year for installations of solar energy systems in the United States.
All told, the EIA projects these changes will slightly decrease the United States’ greenhouse-gas emissions from the use of energy. These emissions, which are a cause of climate change, declined 2.4 percent in 2015. They should drop another 0.3 percent this year.
Fracking Remains Controversial
As an energy source, natural gas burns cleaner than coal when it comes to how much carbon dioxide, a greenhouse gas, is released. However, a great deal of controversy remains over how much gas leaks into the atmosphere because of fracking. These leaks undermine the benefit of burning natural gas instead of coal. 
Natural gas is comprised chiefly of methane. When burned, it releases carbon dioxide into the air. But if methane leaks into the air without burning, it has a much greater warming effect than carbon dioxide. This is especially true over short time frames.
This controversy has been important enough to become part of this year's presidential election. The two Democratic presidential candidates, Bernie Sanders and Hillary Clinton, are split on the subject of natural gas. Clinton has defended natural gas as a lower-carbon “bridge fuel." She wants to use it for a short time until more energy can come from renewable sources. Sanders, however, has called for a ban on fracking because of the damage people say it can do the environment.
      
      