CLEVELAND, Ohio — Many people might cheer for the Cleveland Indians because of their story. 
The Cleveland baseball team is heading to the World Series. The team has not won the Series for many years, so people might root for them.
However, the Indians will play the Chicago Cubs in the World Series. The Cubs have not won the World Series for even longer.
The Cubs are aiming to win their first Series since 1908.
The team is a popular pick to win.
Obama Happy For Chicago
President Barack Obama is a big fan of the White Sox, another team from Chicago, Illinois. Even so, Obama said he was happy to see part of Chicago so excited for the Cubs.
All the love toward the Cubs has left the Indians as underdogs. The Indians are OK with that.
"We believe in each other," first baseman Mike Napoli said Sunday. "We believe that if we go out there and play the game the right way, play as a team like we've done, we can win a game on any night. We've shown in the past two series we can't be taken lightly. We play as a team."
The Indians got to the World Series by winning against the Boston Red Sox and the Toronto Blue Jays. Cleveland wasn't expected to beat Boston, but the Indians swept the Red Sox. Then Cleveland's pitchers cut Toronto's big bats down to toothpicks.
Up next are the Cubs, who won many games this season and have great pitchers. It seems their time has come.
Don't Count Out The Indians
The Indians, though, think they can match up with anyone.
"They're a good team from top to bottom," said Indians pitcher Andrew Miller about the Cubs. "We're going to be going against a good team. That's not a surprise. If you want to count us out, that works for us."
Many of the Indians watched Chicago's last game.
Napoli ended up cheering for the Cubs. The more he thought about a Cleveland-Chicago series, the more he liked it.
"I was rooting for them," Napoli said. "I thought it would be one of the coolest World Series to be a part of."
Another Indians Players Is Hurt
The Indians have not won the World Series for 68 years. They spent the past few days resting while the Cubs finished their games. The time has allowed Cleveland players to get better after being hurt for much of the season. However, team manager Terry Francona said someone else has been hurt.
Second baseman Jason Kipnis hurt his leg after a game in Toronto.
Kipnis was happy that they won the game. He went over to hug another player, Frankie Lindor. Kipnis rolled his foot on Lindor's foot, Francona said.  
"We had some time off, which is good," he said. He expects Kipnis to be OK. 
Kipnis hit balls from Cleveland pitchers during a practice game. Cheering noises were played for the game to make it seem real.
Now Time To Play Ball
Nothing could be quite like the real games, though. Fans in both cities will watch every pitch, knowing that each win moves their team closer to a championship.
One team will end its years of disappointment, while the other will face more heartbreak.
Napoli can't wait for it to get started.
"The Cubs have a lot of history. We have a lot of history," he said. He added that the years without wins are why he wanted to play against them. "It will probably be the coolest thing ever to be a part of that," he said.
      
      