SEATTLE, Wash. — A Washington state judge has ruled that eight Seattle children should have "their day in court" to argue that the state government is not protecting them from climate change.
King County Superior Court Judge Hollis Hill allowed the young petitioners to move ahead in their case against the state. Hill wrote that "it is time for these youth to have the opportunity to address their concerns in a court of law." Their concerns, she added, were upheld by the state and federal constitutions.
The petitioners are all between 12 and 16 years old.
Department Of Ecology Under Scrutiny
Last month, the group asked the judge to find the state's Department of Ecology in contempt – that is, punish it – for failing to adequately protect them and future generations from global warming. 
The Clean Air Rule requires companies and organizations in Washington state to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions by a certain amount over time. On December 19, the judge said Ecology had adopted the Clean Air Rule within the timeline set by the court. As Ecology had complied with these orders, she denied the request to find the department in contempt. 
But the judge did allow the young people to amend their complaint and move ahead with their constitutional claims. That way, she wrote, they could "have their day in court."
The court made this decision, the judge said, due to the urgent need for science-based action by the state of Washington. The state needs to address climate change "before efforts to do so are too costly and too late," she wrote.
Public Trust Doctrine's Requirements
The petitioners can now go to court and argue that Washington has violated their rights under the state's constitution. According to Andrea Rodgers, a Western Environmental Law Center attorney representing the youth, they can point to a legal principle called the public trust doctrine. This principle requires the government to protect shared natural resources, such as the air and shoreline. 
The state has implemented policies in response to climate change, she said, but they are not resulting in greenhouse gas reductions that obey state law and are supported by science.
Department of Ecology spokeswoman Camille St. Onge said the state has adopted one of nation's most progressive carbon pollution reduction regulations. Washington "will continue to do (its) part to help slow climate change," she said.
Pushing Governments To Take Action
The case is part of a larger effort led by the Oregon-based nonprofit Our Children's Trust. It has sought to force governments to take action on climate change.
In November, a federal judge in Eugene, Oregon, allowed a similar climate change case against President Barack Obama's administration to proceed. In that lawsuit, 21 activists ages 9 to 20 argue that the federal government's actions violate their constitutional rights to life, liberty and property. They also claim that the federal government has failed to maintain certain natural resources for future generations.
The judge in Seattle noted that the youth argued in their initial petition for a rule limiting greenhouse gas emissions based on the best available science. A rule has been adopted but, the judge wrote, Ecology agreed that it is not intended to meet the requirements of a state law. This state law requires specific greenhouse gas reductions to be put in place over the next several years.
The petitioners say state governments must adopt science-based requirements to protect the rights of young people and future generations to a stable climate.
The judge said she would retain control of the case.
      
      