WASHINGTON, D.C. — The United Nations (U.N.) is an organization of countries that work together to promote international cooperation. In 2002, the U.N. created the Working Group of Experts on People of African Descent. The group was established to promote the human rights of people of African descent. 
On Friday, the group made an announcement. It said the United States should consider reparations, or making amends, to African-American descendants of slavery. The United States should also establish a national human rights commission and publicly acknowledge that the trans-Atlantic slave trade was a crime against humanity, the group said.
The working group released its initial recommendations after a week of meetings with African-Americans and others. Participants came from Baltimore, Maryland; Chicago, Illinois; New York City, New York; the District of Columbia; and Jackson, Mississippi.
Still Struggling With Many Issues
Mireille Fanon Mendes-France of France is the group's chairwoman. After collecting information, the group was "extremely concerned about the human rights situation of African-Americans," she said in the report. African-Americans still face many challenges in the United States, including the legacy of enslavement that has been handed down to future generations. Many African-Americans feel excluded because of race and experience racial inequality. There has been no real commitment to reparations and to truth and reconciliation for people of African descent, Mendes-France said.
For example, Mendes-France compared the recent deaths of unarmed African-American men like Michael Brown and Eric Garner to the lynchings of black men in the South. Those public hangings took place from the post-Civil War days through the civil rights era. Brown's and Garner's deaths have inspired protests around the country. They have also inspired the Black Lives Matter movement.  
Police Killings Likened To Lynchings
The shock of these recent police killings are reminders "of the racial terror lynchings in the past," she told reporters. Some police officers have not been held accountable for their actions, she said. It has resulted in a human rights crisis and must be addressed urgently, added Mendes-France.
The working group's members, none of who are from the United States, were concerned by the things they learned.
For example, "It's very easy in the United States for African-Americans to be imprisoned," said Sabelo Gumedze of South Africa. 
Thirty-seven percent of the people in state and federal prison in 2014 were African-American males, according to federal officials. The working group suggests that the United States stop punishing smaller crimes with a required number of years in prison. They also suggest ending racial profiling, or targeting a suspect because of his race. Other suggestions are ending excessive bail costs for being released from jail while waiting for court and banning solitary confinement in prison.
Harm Caused By Slave Trade
Ricardo A. Sunga III, who lives in the Philippines, is another member of the working group. He is shocked that the slave trade is not more acknowledged within the United States. 
The working group suggests monuments, markers and memorials should be built in the United States to encourage people to acknowledge this terrible part of history. "Past injustices and crimes against African-Americans need to be addressed," the report said.
The group will suggest several changes to improve human rights for African-Americans. These changes include establishing a national human rights commission, and ratifying, or formally passing, international human rights treaties. Congress will also be asked to study slavery and its aftereffects, and consider reparations.
Group's Second Visit To U.S.
The working group also visited the United States in 2010 and found similar problems. According to its report then, African-Americans faced higher unemployment than whites and made less money. They did not have the same access to education and quality health care. They also face a high rate of certain health conditions, difficulty in exercising their right to vote, and problems in the court system, particularly incarceration rates.
The working group panel will give its final findings to the U.N. Human Rights Council in Geneva, Switzerland, in September.
      
      