LAS VEGAS, Nev. — Wednesday night was the third and final presidential debate in the race to become the 45th president of the United States. The two candidates, Democrat Hillary Clinton and Republican Donald Trump, took the stage. They argued over their very different ideas for the country's future.
Businessman Trump did something never before seen in a presidential debate. He refused to say he would accept the results of the November election. Clinton said Trump's comments were "horrifying."
The U.S. was founded 240 years ago. Since then, the loser in an election has always peacefully stepped aside for the winner.
Trump has spent the days leading up to the debate telling voters that the election will not be fair. Asked whether he would accept the results, he said, "I will tell you at the time. I'll keep you in suspense."
Clinton Says Trump Would Be Putin’s “Puppet”
The U.S. government has said that Russia is trying to affect the election by releasing documents stolen from Democratic Party officials. Trump refused to say Russia was responsible for the hacking. He said the government didn’t know who did it. Clinton accused Trump of favoring Russia over the U.S.
Clinton said that Russian President Vladimir Putin was supporting Trump because Trump would help Russia. She said Trump would act as Putin's "puppet."
The debate opened with a polite discussion about policy issues. Clinton and Trump talked about immigration, the Supreme Court and gun rights. It was very different from the heated and personal clashes of the previous debates. However, Trump quickly switched back to his previous style. He repeatedly interrupted Clinton and moderator Chris Wallace.
The 90-minute debate in Las Vegas, Nevada, came just under three weeks before Election Day. In more than 30 states, some people have already voted early.
Differing Ideas On Immigration And Trade
Trump criticized Clinton’s immigration plan. He accused Clinton of wanting "open borders" so that anyone can enter the U.S. She said that this was not her position. Trump has called for building a wall along the border between the U.S. and Mexico.
Clashing on trade, Trump said Clinton had lied about her position on the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) trade deal. It is a deal that allows the U.S. and 11 other countries to do business together more easily. Some people think it could hurt U.S. businesses and put people out of work. He said that she had originally called it the best deal of its kind. Clinton said that once the deal was finished, it didn't meet her standards. "I'll be against it when I'm president," she said.
A Last Chance For Trump To Shift The Election
For Trump, the debate was one of his last chances to turn around a race that he appears to be losing. Clinton's campaign is confidently expanding into states that usually don't vote for Democrats. Meanwhile, Trump's chances of winning seem to be shrinking. The Republican candidate is already unpopular with many Americans. He has also recently come under attack for his treatment of women.
Clinton began the debate with a lead in most battleground states. Her challenge was to keep up her efforts to paint Trump as unfit to be president while trying to ease the deep disagreements among groups of voters. This is no easy task for the Democratic candidate. Many voters still have questions about her honesty.
Clinton Questioned About Aide's Hacked Emails
For the first time, Clinton faced debate questions about information in her top assistant's hacked emails. The messages show her being more friendly with Wall Street bankers than she has said in public. Clinton quickly changed the subject by saying Russia had stolen the emails.
Trump entered the final debate facing new attacks over his treatment of women.
Clinton said Trump thinks bullying women "makes him bigger. He goes after their dignity, their self-worth."
      
      