SARASOTA, Fla. — It's the end of an era. Say goodbye to trapeze artists. Say so-long to lion tamers holding whips. Send out the clowns. The Big Top is coming down for good.
Last weekend, Ringling Bros. and Barnum and Bailey Circus officials announced that it will close in May after a 146-year run. When the circuses first debuted, there were no automobiles, airplanes or movies.
What killed the circus? There are many suspects: increased railroad costs, expensive court battles with animal rights activists that led to an end to elephant acts, and then some people did not want to see a show without elephants.
But mostly, in an era of "Pokemon Go," online role-playing games and YouTube celebrities, the "Greatest Show on Earth" doesn't seem so great.
"It's been through world wars, and it's been through every kind of economic cycle and it's been through a lot of change," said Kenneth Feld, chairman and CEO of Feld Entertainment, owner of Ringling Bros. But in the past 10 years, something shifted.
"I think it isn't relevant to people in the same way," Feld said.
A Wildly Popular Traveling Zoo
For a long time, the circus was more than relevant, or important — it was the stuff that dreams were made of.
The first circuses were created in Europe. Americans added a twist in the 19th century. Collapsible tents made of canvas, which allowed mobile troupes to travel far and wide to perform for their audiences, were born. 
Phineas Taylor Barnum's traveling zoo was wildly popular. The five Ringling brothers performed juggling acts and skits in Wisconsin. Eventually, Barnum, the Ringlings and another performance-minded businessman named James Bailey combined their acts and knowledge. 
Sprawling companies traveled around America by train, wowing audiences. Deborah Walk is assistant director of legacy and circus at The Ringling, a mansion-turned-circus-museum that belonged to John Ringling. She said that the circus' effect on small town America is often overlooked.
"That wonderful show that you can see in Madison Square Garden crisscrossed the country and ended up in San Francisco. And every place in between saw the same thing," she said.
"It brought the wonders of the world to your door. You didn't have to go to Africa or Asia to see the animals."
Dreams Of Running Away With The Circus
The circus also heralded societal changes, Walk said. Women became performers around the turn of the 20th century, although there would be no African-American ringmaster until 1999 or a female ringmaster until 2016.
When the circus came to town, kids dreamed of running away to join it and its ever-changing line-up of clowns, daredevil trapeze artists, and lion tamers. 
The circus was so important to home-front morale, or spirit, that President Franklin D. Roosevelt gave Ringling Bros. special permission to use the rails during World War II.
"The circus is the only ageless delight that you can buy for money," famous author Ernest Hemingway wrote in 1953. "It is the only spectacle I know, that, while you watch it, gives the quality of a truly happy dream."
Technology Woos Kids Away From The Big Top
But as the 20th century went on, kids became less enthralled. Movies, television, video games and the Internet captured young minds. The circus didn't have savvy product merchandising tie-ins or Saturday morning cartoons to shore up, or boost, its image. After 1956, the circus no longer performed under tents and instead moved to arenas.
The public grew conflicted about animal acts. Circuses without animals — such as Cirque du Soleil — were smaller and growing in popularity.
Animal rights activists put pressure on cities where the circus toured. Los Angeles and Oakland, California, prohibited the use of bull-hooks by elephant trainers. Asheville, North Carolina, banned wild animals from performing in the city-owned stadium.
Elephants In The Legal Spotlight
In 2014, Feld Entertainment won $25.2 million in settlements from groups including the Humane Society of the United States. This ended a 14-year legal battle over charges that circus employees mistreated elephants.
The initial lawsuit was filed by a former Ringling barn helper who accepted at least $190,000 from animal-rights groups. The judge called him "essentially a paid plaintiff" who lacked credibility and standing to sue, and rejected the abuse claims.
Kenneth Feld testified about the elephants' importance to the show at that 2009 trial.
"The symbol of the 'Greatest Show on Earth' is the elephant, and that's what we've been known for throughout the world for more than a hundred years," he said.
Asked whether the show would be the same without elephants, Feld replied, "No, it wouldn't."
And it wasn't. Feld Entertainment removed the elephants in 2016, sending all 40 of them to the Center for Elephant Conservation in Florida. Ticket sales plummeted. The circus, already an afterthought for many, receded further in the public mind.
The Numbers Were Troubling
The Felds said they looked at scenarios and costs. They ran numbers and tried new things — an interactive phone app, ice skaters in the show, adding motorcycle stunts — but nothing worked.
The show will go on at smaller and more specialized circuses. But come May, after almost a century and a half of spectacular shows, the Ringling Bros. and Barnum and Bailey Circus will vanish, like a big, colorful, improbably long dream.
      
      