FRESNO, Calif. — Eight-year-old Jalen Bailey was saving some of his money. He wanted a stand mixer, a tool to help him mix cookie dough. That machine can be expensive.
His mom taught him to save for the “good stuff,” and he’s running a bakery. Thankfully, someone donated the mixer he wanted. Now he can use it for making cookies and cakes. And he’s back to saving up for the rest of the "good stuff" on his good list.
The first thing on his list is a house for himself and his single mom. They live in a small apartment they rent in the middle of Fresno.
Jalen says he wants a house with a bigger kitchen. It would let him bake more things and spend more fun time with his mom. 
Baking His Way To A Home
He’s enjoyed baking with his mom, Sharhonda Mahan, for many years. He founded Jalen’s Bakery to help make his dreams come true on July 1. He has been more passionate ever since. Jalen is saving money for a house, school, a puppy and savings.
Then he looks at his mom, and, as if not to hurt her feelings in describing what counts as good stuff, he changes his mind. “I mean, not houses, you don’t have to … ” His voice trails off, and he looks down at the floor. He thinks about what he said for a moment, then he gets excited, and he’s sitting upright again, bright-eyed. “But – we want to!”
His mother told him not to worry about the house, she’s working on that, but he’s still saving for it. Jalen doesn’t just want a house for a bigger kitchen. He wants a golden retriever. Dogs are not allowed in the apartment he shares with his mom.
“It looks beauuuutifuuuullll!” he says of his dream dog.
A Kind Heart
Jalen also has a GoFundMe website where people can give him money.
“My mommy told me about how there are a lot of homeless people in the world,” Jalen says. “I didn’t want anybody to feel left out, because there are a lot of kids walking home with their backpacks with all their school supplies. Maybe they (homeless children) were watching them. Maybe they wanted those things.”
He started collecting school supplies for these children when he was 5 years old. He wants to give them much more.
“If we get enough money, we could buy everything for the little children. They’ll be screaming, ‘Yaaaayyyyy!’” Jalen says.
Mahan says Jalen came up with the idea to collect supplies for other kids on his own. She’s surprised by how kind he is. She says, “That’s something you can’t teach.”
Lessons In Money Management
Mahan explains that she decided to home-school Jalen until last year and make a living working as a nanny from home so she could spend more time with her son.
Mahan helped plant the seed for Jalen’s business plans. She studied business and has been teaching Jalen about wise money management and starting a business for some time. She says it is information she wishes someone had taught her as a child. She does not want Jalen to have to live “paycheck to paycheck.” She wants him to be able to save, have a house and buy the things he wants.
First Taste Tester
She started educating him early, teaching him his first words as a baby. By the time he was old enough to start school, she says, a test showed Jalen was already reading at a second-grade level.
“I have so many big things for him, you know,” Mahan says. She wants him to try his best and figure out what he likes. She will support him completely. Right now, that means helping Jalen run a bakery from their apartment.
Customers can order Jalen’s baked goods and T-shirts online. Jalen will deliver the goods locally. Mahan says the health department approved a number of goodies, like cookies and cakes. Customers can order other treats. Jalen just needs to like it first.
      
      