WASHINGTON, D.C. — March 1 was "Super Tuesday" in the primary elections. It was a good night for Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton.
The primaries are the first round of elections to pick the next president of the United States. There are two large political groups in the United States, the Democrats and the Republicans.
During the primaries, the Democrats and the Republicans each choose a person to run for president. The primaries take several months. The two political groups hold elections in each state. Most of the time, people who belong to the Democratic Party vote to decide on the Democratic candidate. Republicans vote to pick the Republican candidate.
Cruz, Trump, Rubio All Win Primaries
This Tuesday was the biggest day of the primaries so far. March 1 is called "Super Tuesday" because of how many states vote on that day. On Super Tuesday, the Democrats and Republicans held primaries in 12 states.
Trump won most of the Republican elections. He is a wealthy businessman from New York, but is quite new to politics. Meanwhile, Clinton won most of the Democratic primaries. She used to be a senator and worked with President Barack Obama as secretary of state. Trump and Clinton were both victorious in Georgia, Tennessee, Alabama, Arkansas, Massachusetts and Virginia. 
Clinton is now the most likely Democrat to become the Democratic candidate. Trump is winning most of the Republican votes.
Still, Trump did not win every state. Another Republican politician, Ted Cruz, won his home state of Texas. He also won in neighboring Oklahoma. Florida Senator Marco Rubio won in Minnesota.
A Not So Super Tuesday For Rubio
Meanwhile, Bernie Sanders, another Democratic politician, had some victories as well. He won in his home state of Vermont. He also won in Oklahoma, Colorado and Minnesota.
Clinton is already setting her sights on Trump. She referred to him in her victory speech Tuesday night. Without mentioning his name, she criticized him for his impolite style.
Trump talked about Clinton in his victory speech as well. He suggested that, during her long time in politics, she had failed Americans.
Unlike Clinton, Trump is new to politics, and his success so far has been surprising to many. Some people love him, while others hate him. 
One of Trump's rival candidates, Marco Rubio, has been criticizing Trump lately, telling voters not to trust him. For Rubio, Super Tuesday was disappointing. He has only won one state so far.
Super Tuesday Favors Trump
Ted Cruz desperately needed his win in Texas in order to stay in the race. He is likely to continue campaigning as the only Republican who has been able to defeat Trump in any primary contest so far.
Still, Trump's wins in the South were a blow to Cruz, who once hoped to pick up more wins in the region. Instead, he has watched Trump continue to be popular with Southern voters.
Many people doubted that Trump would get this far. Some of his ideas and comments have been called racist, and he has a rude way of speaking. Some people hoped that voters would turn on Trump, but instead, he has only grown more popular. Super Tuesday showed that he is the most likely Republican candidate.
In the Democratic race, Clinton appears to be in a strong position as well. She is in the lead after an unexpectedly strong early challenge from Sanders.
      
      