SAN JOSE, Calif. — Robert Ballard is best known for finding famous sunken ships. He discovered the luxury British passenger ship, the Titanic, and the German battleship, the Bismarck. He also found the USS Yorktown aircraft carrier. He even discovered the sunken patrol torpedo boat commanded by John F. Kennedy before he was a U.S. president.
This week, the oceanographer added another find to his list of the world’s greatest shipwrecks. Ballard and his team captured the first images of the USS Independence taken in more than 60 years. The World War II aircraft carrier was scuttled, or sunk by its own crew, in 1951. It has been resting half a mile under the sea, about 30 miles west of Half Moon Bay in California. 
An Underwater Museum
Ballard’s team did not work alone. They were helped by the United States Navy and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). The team took pictures of the ship's flight deck and a fighter plane. There were also images of anti-aircraft guns, hatches and ladders. Even the letters of the ship’s name are still visible on its body. 
Ballard says, “It was really nice to read the name on the side. You think, ‘Good, I found the right ship.’”
Wrecks like the Independence that are found in deep water tend to be very well-preserved, and the same is true for the Titanic and the Bismarck. Ballard says, “There’s very little change from when the Navy scuttled it. The deep sea is the largest museum on Earth.”
Ballard is a retired Navy officer and runs a group called the Ocean Exploration Trust. It is based in Connecticut. The group plans to build a detailed 3-D digital image of the Independence from the thousands of photographs they took with two unmanned, underwater vehicles
Interactive Viewing
Viewers in more than 30 countries watched the discoveries live through the Internet. They were able to see the ship at the same moments as researchers aboard Ballard’s ship, the Nautilus.
Huge, white sponges covered the Independence decks, and deep sea sole and orange thornyhead fish swam by. Large fishing nets could also be seen draped across the ship. Meanwhile, students emailed questions to the researchers, who answered immediately.
James Delgado, who works for the NOAA, is pleased and surprised with the find. He says, “Independence is in much better condition than I had expected. It looks as it did in the 1946 photographs. It is a frozen moment in time.”
For Delgado, seeing the Hellcat fighter plane was one of the most exciting discoveries. “It’s damaged, but the star, the insignia, is still there on the wing and the 50-caliber guns are still in place,” he says.
Nuclear Guinea Pig
The Independence is a 623-foot-long, light aircraft carrier. The ship saw combat in Japan, the Philippine Islands, and more between 1943 and 1945. 
In 1946, the United States used the Independence for nuclear tests in the South Pacific Ocean. It was placed about 500 yards from two nuclear blasts, so naval officials could study how likely their ships were to be wrecked by atomic weapons. The Independence was damaged, but did not sink.
The Navy then disposed of it by towing it out to sea and blowing it up with torpedoes.
The Independence sank on January 26, 1951, and was lost until 1990, when United States scientists found it while mapping the seafloor. Scans taken by NOAA last year showed more detail. However, until now, there were no photos or video of the Independence in its final resting place.
Navy records show that the ship carried a number of barrels full of low-level nuclear waste when it sank. The barrels were filled with concrete and put in a sealed room on the ship. However, Delgado says that the expedition found no trace of the barrels.
Kai Vetter is a professor at the University of California, Berkeley. He says that the ship and its contents are not a risk to ocean wildlife or to the public. Because 70 years has passed, there is less than 1 percent of the original radioactivity left.
The Bottom Of The World's Oceans
Ballard says that there are as many as 3 million shipwrecks at the bottom of the world’s oceans. Ships in shallow water are covered with plants because sunlight reaches there. This breaks those wrecks down faster than ships like the Independence that are sunk in deep waters.
      
      