OLYMPIA, Wash. — Suzi Allan heard from her son's teacher that his handwriting needed work. She asked when the class would learn cursive writing. The teacher told her the school no longer taught the flowing, old-fashioned penmanship. Allan was offered an online packet in case she wanted to teach her son cursive at home. 
Many people are convinced cursive is dying. Schools around the country have been dropping it. Teachers are too busy teaching other subjects. They also need to use classroom time to prepare students for important tests. The biggest reason is because we are living in the digital age. Students now use computers more often.
Some people want to keep cursive alive. They think it's a necessary skill to learn. A person signs their name in cursive when opening a bank account, for example. Cursive is also needed when reading important historical papers. The Declaration of Independence is one such document. It was written to announce that the 13 American colonies had declared their independence from Great Britain. 
Lawmaker Tried – And Failed – To Make Cursive A Requirement
Pam Roach is a state lawmaker in Washington in state. Not long ago, she tried to get a law passed. It would require cursive to be taught in Washington schools. However, it never got voted on so it did not become a law.
We are creating a giant split, Roach said. "The first generation can read our history, and the other cannot."
Roach said she gave her grandson a grocery list written in cursive. She was shocked when he could not read her list. 
Right now, cursive must be taught at schools in 15 states. Other states let different school districts decide. Sometimes teachers are left to make the call on their own. 
Teachers Can Choose To Teach It
Sarah Gillispie works for the Sumner School District in Washington state. “Cursive is no longer required,” she said. Teachers can choose to teach it. However, the district has moved away from handwriting and now teaches more computer and keyboarding skills. 
Virginia Berninger teaches at the University of Washington. She studied the way students grow while they learn. She did tests on how different kinds of writing helped students learn. 
Berninger said printing, handwriting and typing should all be taught. Each helps the brain learn in different ways.
Many teachers are too busy teaching other subjects, though. They worry they will not have time to teach more material.
Printing, Cursive And Typing All Help Students Learn
Fortunately, Berninger's study offered good news. It does not take many hours for a writing style to sink in. Students can master any form of writing by working for just five to 10 minutes a day. Ideally, they will practice three times a week. That amount of time is just as useful as studying for 30 minutes to an hour.
Many things we read are printed. Berninger found handwritten printing helps with reading skills. Therefore, children should learn how to print from kindergarten to second grade.
Cursive helps with spelling and forming sentences. It connects letters together. Students recognize letters as whole words, Berninger said. Her study showed it is best to teach cursive in third and fourth grade.
The right way to type is using both hands without looking at them. It helps strengthen the left and right side of the brain. For that reason, children should learn how to type as early as fourth grade. They should continue through eighth grade.
Berninger said all three types of writing are important tools. They help us express ideas and communicate with one another.
      
      