New maps show that about 325 square miles of critical koala habitat in Queensland, Australia, have been destroyed following the relaxation of local tree clearing laws. Two years ago, the koala, Australia's national icon, was listed as endangered. 
The koala's homeland made up about 14 percent of all land cleared between 2013 and 2015. This was an alarming revelation, according to the World Wildlife Fund and the Australian Koala Foundation.
Deborah Tabart, the chief executive of the Australian Koala Foundation, said that the loss of that much land was “shocking, given the recent statement that koalas are functionally extinct in various parts of Queensland."
Koalas Are Endangered
Tabart asked how this could have been allowed when the koala was listed as endangered by the government in 2012.
“Why wasn’t this land clearing referred to the federal government instead of a rubber stamp here in Queensland?” she asked. “The Australian Koala Foundation stands ready to give any member of parliament a briefing on the plight of koalas.”
World Wildlife Fund scientist Martin Taylor said, “If we want to save koalas in Queensland then we have to stop the bulldozers destroying their habitat – it’s that simple.”
Political Parties And Government At Odds
A Queensland government bill that is due to be discussed by parliament shortly would restore the controls on land clearing that were undone by the former Liberal National government. The Liberal National Party is the conservative party in Queensland. 
The government argues that land clearing reforms have been very important. They stopped runoff to the Great Barrier Reef. The change convinced UNESCO to keep the natural wonder off its “in danger” list last year.
The proposed reforms have provoked staunch opposition from the rural lobby AgForce. However, AgForce is not a political party, but a group in Queensland that attempts to persuade state politicians to make and vote for laws that help farmers. Other political parties oppose the bill as well, including the Liberal National Party and two representatives from the smaller Katter Party. They will oppose it when the vote takes place.
Peter Wellington is an independent member of parliament whose vote might decide whether the bill passes or not. Wellington was supposed to meet Greenpeace representatives before the parliamentary meeting began. They were going to give him a petition of almost 24,000 Queenslanders in favor of restoring controls.
Earlier, an estimated 200 demonstrators rallied outside parliament in favor of the laws.
The Queensland law society has condemned a part of the bill that will not require landholders to provide proof that they did not unlawfully clear land. The current Queensland state government, headed by Annastacia Palaszczuk, has compared this situation to speeding tickets.
Environment Department Intervenes
Last week, the government's environment department launched a landmark intervention to halt clearing on a north Queensland property. They wanted to study the impact of the Environmental Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act, expressing concern about possible effects on the reef.
Queensland Senator Ian MacDonald raised concerns about the federal government of Australia interfering in permits already granted by the state government.
The mapping of the clearing of koala homeland is the result of joint work by the World Wildlife Fund and the Australian Koala Foundation. They compared state government land cover surveys, which show land use, with koala population maps. The maps show that 91 percent of clearing was for cattle pasture.
Number Of Miles Cleared Has Increased
About 180 square miles were cleared between 2014 and 2015, which is up from the 140 square miles cleared the year before. 
The single largest amount of clearing took place in the old National Party heartland in western Queensland. At 45 square miles, it was nearly double the amount cleared in the next-highest local government area.
There was also significant clearing of koala homeland in other rural areas as well. Almost all of the areas lie west of the Great Dividing Range, Australia's largest mountain range. 
Clearing forests in Queensland has more than tripled in the last five years. It has gone from about 300 square miles cleared between 2009 and 2010, to about 1,140 square miles between 2014 and 2015.
      
      