WASHINGTON, D.C. — President Barack Obama met with Donald Trump on Thursday. Two days earlier, Americans voted for their 45th president. They chose Trump, a Republican. It was a shocking win for the businessman and television star who has never been a lawmaker. He defeated Democrat Hillary Clinton.
Obama and Trump met at the White House. They talked for 90 minutes. Obama called the meeting "excellent," and Trump said he looked forward to getting more of Obama's help.
Obama said he would try to help Trump be a good president. "If you succeed the country succeeds," he said.
Trump: Obama Is A "Very Good Man"
The two men were meeting for the first time on Thursday. Trump called Obama a "very good man." He said he looked forward "to dealing with the president in the future."
During the race for president, Obama said Trump was unfit to lead America. Trump also attacked Obama. For years, he spread a lie about him. Trump said that the president was not born in the United States.
At the meeting, the two men were polite. Obama even smiled at Trump when the meeting ended.
Trump Also Met With Republican Leaders
From the White House, Trump went to Capitol Hill. This is where lawmakers meet. Trump met with Republican leaders to talk about their lawmaking plans. Republicans and Democrats are the two main political groups in the U.S. Trump is a Republican. Obama is a Democrat.
Trump said the Republicans have great plans for America.
If he follows his promises, Trump will undo most of Obama's work. He said he wants to remove Obama's health care law. The law changed health care for many people. Trump also wants to build a wall between the U.S. and Mexico.
Since Trump won the election, there have been protests. Many people are not happy that he won. They wish Clinton had won instead. Across the country, people went out to share their anger. They chanted "Not my president."
Trump Will Take Office In January
Trump will become the president on Jan. 20, 2017. He is working with a team to plan his new government. Their job is to choose people for the most important jobs.
Trump has never been a lawmaker before. But he is getting help from people with experience in government. Most of these people are other Republicans.
But some are Democrats on Obama's team. They will help Trump's team learn what to do when there is an emergency.
      
      