A new and terrible kind of war could be coming soon, if we do not act in time to stop it. It would not be fought anywhere on Earth but far above our heads in outer space.
Outer space might seem like a strange thing for nations to fight over. Most of us think of it as nothing but vast emptiness. 
In fact, outer space is not so empty anymore. About 1,300 space satellites now orbit Earth. They provide worldwide communications, GPS navigation, weather forecasting and the planetary surveillance that allows militaries to monitor the activities of possible enemies around the world. For militaries that rely on satellites, space has become essential territory. 
China, Russia Step Up Military Space Programs
For years, the United States has been by far the leading presence in space. Now, however, China and Russia are seeking to challenge the U.S. in space. Both are developing ambitious military space programs of their own. 
The power struggle could potentially lead to a conflict in space that would do serious damage to the satellite system. In turn, that would lead to disruptions in communication and in all the other things satellites now make possible. Furthermore, even if such a conflict began in space, it could easily set off a full-blown war on Earth.
U.S. officials have been alarmed by recent tests by China and Russia of what could be anti-satellite weapons. Meanwhile, talks held at the United Nations last month were not successful in resolving tensions.
U.S. Reacts To China's Space Tests
The threat to U.S. satellites is growing, says James Clapper, who heads the U.S. government's spy program. China in particular has shown a desire to develop the ability "to interfere with, damage and destroy” U.S. satellites, Clapper said. As proof, he pointed to a series of Chinese anti-satellite missile tests that began in 2007.
In response to these possible threats, the U.S. government plans to spend at least $5 billion on strengthening its military space program. The U.S. is also attempting to tackle the problem through talks with other countries, although so far with little success.
“The United States does not want conflict in outer space,” says Frank Rose, who has led American efforts to reach an agreement with China and Russia. The U.S. is willing to work with both countries to keep space secure, Rose says. However, the U.S. will vigorously defend its space satellites if they are attacked.
All Satellites Are At Risk
There are now hundreds upon hundreds of satellites from about 60 different nations orbiting Earth. Despite their largely peaceful purposes, every satellite is at risk.
There are many ways to disable or destroy satellites beyond blowing them up with missiles. A spacecraft could simply approach a satellite and spray paint over its cameras, or snap off its communications antennas. Lasers could be used to temporarily disable or permanently damage a satellite’s parts, particularly its delicate sensors. Radio or microwaves could be used to cut off communication with satellites.
However, the greatest threat is debris, the bits and pieces of junk that float around space. Satellites travel at great speeds. The easiest way to destroy one is simply to launch something into its path. 
Just A Marble Could Do It
Even an object as small and simple as a marble can disable or entirely destroy a billion-dollar satellite. This could set off a dangerous chain-reaction. If a satellite was destroyed by debris, it would create even more debris, posing a danger to other satellites.
Recently, China has been testing what many experts say are ground-based anti-satellite weapons. Russia is also developing ways of approaching, inspecting and destroying satellites in orbit. 
Chinese officials maintain that their military activities in space are simply peaceful scientific experiments. Russian officials have mostly stayed silent. 
Both nations could be developing their programs because they fear the U.S. is secretly developing anti-satellite weapons. Indeed, they may have good reasons for that suspicion. Recently, Congress has been pushing for an increased effort to develop space weapons. 
“I hope to never fight a war in space,” said General John Hyten, the head of the U.S. Air Force Space Command. “It’s bad for the world." However, "if war does extend into space,” the U.S. needs to be ready, he said.
Limit Space Junk
Michael Krepon, who studies efforts to control the spread of weapons, sees things differently. For him, the real issue is not space weapons but dangerous debris. 
The space environment must be protected for the good of all nations, Krepon says. Space junk is very easy to make and very hard to clean up, so there should be an international effort to prevent it from building up. 
The risk of crashing into debris will continue to grow as more nations launch more satellites into space. There is the added risk that an accident might be misunderstood as a purposeful attack. Such a mistake could lead to war.
“We are in the process of messing up space, and most people don’t realize it,” Krepon says. Something must be done soon, he says, before it is too late.
      
      