BANGKOK, Thailand — Three students taking a test used technology to cheat. Their devices were like something out of a spy movie. They used glasses with tiny cameras and smartwatches.

The students were taking tests for admission to medical school. They live in Thailand, a country in Southeast Asia. After the students were caught cheating, Rangsit University canceled its tests.
Old Problem, New Approach
Cheating has been a problem in Thai schools and colleges for a long time. However, the use of technology has taken the practice to a whole new level.
"We've never found cheating of this level," said Kittisak Tripipatpornchai, who works at the school. "We've had some cases of students copying from one another. ... Now we're going to be paying much closer attention."
Cheating Their Own Futures
Cheating is a surprise compared with the good behavior expected of Thais. From a young age, Thais are taught to be polite and disciplined. But teachers say cheating has become more common. The school system uses exam scores as the only way to test  students and decide whether they get into colleges.
The three students were caught red-handed. They have been banned by the university. These students will not be allowed to go to the school.
It was a complicated plan.
Three people pretended to be students. They photographed the question sheets with tiny cameras inside their eyeglasses. They left the room after the 45-minute period. Then, they shared the pictures with another person on a laptop. That person sent the pictures to one or more tutoring companies where the three students were enrolled. Exam answers were then sent electronically to the smartwatches worn by the students who were still in the testing room.
University employees were told after the first watch was taken during the Saturday morning test. The second watch was found on the same day in the afternoon. The third watch and two pairs of glasses were taken on Sunday.
Kittisak said the three students bought admission into the university from the tutoring companies. They paid 800,000 baht ($23,000).
School President Goes Public
Schools have tried to find ways to stop cheating. Chulalongkorn University added cameras to some of its testing rooms. Kasetsart University created anti-cheating hats with two pieces of paper stapled to a headband. This way, students cannot see out of the corners of their eyes.
Rangsit University's president, Dr. Arthit Ourairat, posted pictures of the electronic devices on his Facebook page, getting nationwide attention in the news.
"If you can't take responsibility for your own life, you don't deserve to become a doctor," Namstok Punika, a Facebook user, wrote.
One student's parents met with university officials.
The father said he did not know anything about the cheating, Kittisak said. "But then how would a high school student be able to pay 800,000 baht on their own?"
      
      