MIAMI, Fla. — Jose Fernandez was one of the brightest young stars in baseball before he died. He meant more than just a baseball player, though.
Fernandez's story was the story of many people from South Florida. The Marlins’ star pitcher made four tries to leave Cuba for the United States. Cuba is an island in the Caribbean. It was ruled by a strict ruler named Fidel Castro. Finally, Fernandez succeeded in escaping. He took a boat with his mother when he was 15 years old.
The first three times Fernandez tried to escape, he was turned back. He was also put in jail. On the fourth try, he jumped into the water during the night. Someone had fallen off the boat. He needed to save them.
He didn't know it then but the drowning person was his mother. He saved her.
Success In Baseball
“He represented freedom in a way that most no one here can understand,” Marlins president David Samson said on Sunday. “He always would tell me that: ‘You were born into freedom. You don’t understand freedom really.’"
Fernandez’s story in baseball is interesting, too. He won the Rookie of the Year award in 2013. He was also considered for pitching awards.
Fernandez also brought excitement to the Marlins’ new ballpark that opened in 2012. The park is in the Little Havana neighborhood of Miami. Many Cuban-Americans live there. The team has struggled to build a fan base there.
“He gave you a reason to come to the ballpark,” said 18-year-old Felipe Zwanzger. “I bought season tickets to watch him pitch.”
He Played With Great Joy
Fernandez’s path in baseball wasn’t all smooth. In 2014, he hurt his elbow badly. It took him 14 months to get healthy again.
Fernandez has been great since his return in 2015, though. Even so, the numbers were overshadowed by his view of the game.
“I see such a little boy in him, the way he played,” said Don Mattingly. Mattingly manages the Marlins players. “He just seemed like a little kid that you see when you watch kids play Little League. That’s the joy that Jose played with."
      
      