
Eat your vegetables and avoid fat and cholesterol. Wait, fat and cholesterol are OK. Fine, get plenty of protein, but not animal protein. Well, maybe animal protein is OK, but just in small quantities.
The basic ideas about healthy eating have not changed much from your great-grandmother’s time. Consume a variety of foods, maintain an ideal weight, and avoid too much salt and sugar. However, nutrition wars rage over the details and scientists keep changing their advice.
In a 2012 U.S. poll, half of those who responded said it was easier to do their taxes than to figure out what is healthy to eat. Why isn’t it simpler? For one thing, nutrition science is a new area of research and it is not yet very reliable. And, there’s lots of money to be made in the food business, so companies will market their food as healthy so shoppers will buy it.
The Situation
In 2011, the U.S. government put out dietary guidelines to restrict dietary cholesterol and total fat consumption. The panel of scientists wrote that a healthy diet is “lower in red and processed meat” because these meats lead to higher death rates from cancer and heart disease. After strong objections from the meat industry, that caution was dropped in 2016. However, men and teenage boys were advised to eat less protein by decreasing consumption of meat, poultry and eggs.
The Background
High levels of cholesterol in blood have long been linked to heart disease. The body produces cholesterol on its own, but this fat-like substance is also in food. New research looked at healthy people who ate eggs and shellfish that are high in cholesterol. The study found these foods did not change the blood very much.
Ideas about fats are changing, too. Now nutritionists say there are really bad trans fats (in margarine and vegetable shortening) and bad saturated fats (in red meat and whole milk). They also say there are good unsaturated fats (in olive oil and nuts). But, a 2013 review of 72 studies found saturated fat did not cause more heart disease. There are new 2016 U.S. guidelines. They say that the average teenager needs 2,400 calories a day.  But, only 10 percent, or 240 calories, should come from saturated fats. These guidelines also say to cut out all trans fats. The science of fats is far from certain. 
This research shows the weakness in nutrition science. There are no controlled experiments because people cannot be watched while they are taking part. Rather, nutrition studies rely on volunteers to self-report what they eat, which is unreliable. So, results often cannot be replicated or reproduced by other groups.
  
The Argument
The 2016 U.S. nutrition guidelines have 204 pages. They are very complicated, making many believe that they have, at times, contributed to worsening health. For instance, warnings in earlier guidelines that the fat in butter and cream produced heart attacks prompted many consumers to switch to margarine and nondairy creamer. But these contain the trans fats scientists now think are more hazardous.
Furthermore, warnings to avoid fat altogether led Americans to eat significantly more carbohydrates. The carbohydrates in "fat-free" diets increase sugar in the blood, leading to more weight gain and type 2 diabetes.
The 2016 guidelines won praise for focusing less on individual nutrients than on dietary patterns, better reflecting how people actually eat and accounting for the fact that foods interact with each other. Foods such as a variety of vegetables, whole fruits and grains are recommended, but when it comes to things to avoid, the guidelines mention added sugars, saturated fats and sodium, rather than items that contain these things, like soda, meat and junk food.
Government officials have said the guidelines are based on nutrition science and not on what food companies want people to eat. They also said they listened to comments from the public. Some nutritionists think the guidelines should be easier to understand, which would put them more in line with the eating advice given by the World Health Organization.
      
      