LOS ANGELES, CA — Renata Phillip had been a teacher for 11 years. She was happy in her work. Then last August, she decided to make a serious career change. She is training to become a Los Angeles County sheriff's deputy. Her friends and family were shocked.
Racial Tensions
Phillip has chosen a challenging time to become a police officer. Police are facing much criticism lately. A number of unarmed black men across the country have been killed by police officers. Most police officers are not black. Recently, police in Milwaukee, Wisconsin shot a black man who had a gun in his hand. The man's death sparked violent protests there. 
Phillip is a black woman. She grew up in a mostly white, upper-middle-class neighborhood near Los Angeles. 
Phillip hopes to be an example to those who have never talked with a black police officer.
Mommy, There Goes A Girl Cop
Last year, Asia Hardy was in Phillip's shoes. She was a black woman training to become an officer with the Los Angeles Police Department.
Hardy has been a probationary officer for just over a year. She has more limited officer responsibilities and lots more supervision than police officers who are not on probation. Hardy works in one of the most dangerous neighborhoods in Los Angeles.
She said Phillip should expect both criticism and praise on the streets.
"I get called a sellout sometimes," she said. 
Others are inspired by Hardy. 
"You get the little girl pointing at you and saying, 'Look, Mommy, there's a girl cop.' Things like that make my day. I want that little girl to know she can grow up and be a cop if she wants to."
"We're Hiring!" Say Police
Black officers made up about 12 out of 100 of all police in 2013. Yet, black people make up a little more than 13 out of 100 people in the whole country. Police departments have struggled to hire more black officers. 
A sniper attack killed five officers in Dallas, Texas last month. The officers had been watching a protest, to make sure people did not break laws or become violent. The protest was against black men being killed by police. Days later, Dallas Police Chief David Brown urged black people to leave protests. He asked them to join the department to work for change from within.
"Serve your community," said Brown, who is black. "We're hiring."
Problems Outside The Classroom
Phillip realized she was spending more and more time helping her students with problems outside the classroom, and that she was enjoying it. It was then that she decided to become a police officer. 
One of her students had lost a friend to gang violence. He was disrupting class. He was getting into drugs and into trouble. Phillip worked to gain his trust and helped him transfer to another school.
Challenging Recruitment Process
Phillip is one of just two black women in her class of 84 police officers in training. More than half of them are men and most are white or Hispanic.
Captain Scott Gage is in charge of training at the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department. He says only 3 recruits out of every 100 will make it to graduation.
The officers in training have to go through a lot of checks. The police department looks into their pasts. They also have to go through challenging physical requirements. The process takes a year. 
Hardy said she specifically requested to work in the area where there was the most crime.
"I knew a lot of African Americans live there and I wanted to be there to reach out, I want everybody to do better," she said. "Them seeing me out there and knowing, 'Wow, there goes a female cop. A black female cop.' I wanted to be that example."
      
      