CROSWELL, Mich. — Students all over the U.S. cut up dead animals in science class. It's a kind of high school tradition. 
Not many students, though, stuff and mount the animals afterward.
A Michigan high school is teaching students to do just that.
Croswell-Lexington High offered a taxidermy course for the first time this school year. Taxidermy involves removing the skins of dead animals, then treating and stuffing the skins. The other step is to stretch the skin over a hard mold. The idea is to make the animals look like they did when they were alive. So far, the taxidermy class has been a hit.
People In Area Like Hunting, Fishing
Sixty students enrolled in the first two sections of the class. About a dozen had to be turned away, said Ryan Cayce, the principal at Croswell-Lexington. The school is about 80 miles north of Detroit, in a community near Lake Huron. The people there have long enjoyed hunting and fishing.
Teacher Kyle Tubbs, who owns a taxidermy business, last year suggested the idea of the class to Cayce. The principal agreed to the idea. 
Senior Matt Barker, a trapper and hunter, said the course is perfect for him.
"This is one of the best classes that I've had, because it's a very hands-on class," Barker said. He was taking a break from removing the flesh from a dead opossum. He had trapped it in his grandfather's backyard.
Some Use Animals Hit By Cars
Students in the 13-week class must bring in an animal that they hunted, trapped or found dead. Dead animals hit by cars can be used.
In Mieyah Brenton's case, the red-bellied woodpecker the senior worked on was a gift from the family cat.
"I just want this eye to be where it's supposed to," a frustrated Brenton said to her lab mates before poking a blade into the dead bird's eye.
Brenton said many people think the class is disgusting.  However, she says "it's just kind of something that's cool to learn, especially if you like biology."
Class Fits State Science Guidelines
The class meets state standards for science instruction, Tubbs said.
Many students in the taxidermy class already have studied biology, Cayce said.
Having studied the science of living things may help the students in this course. 
Cayce added that the class fits in well with the other physical science courses.
Tubbs said the class fits in well with the study of art, too. He points out that students who mount a full-bodied animal are also asked to make a scene to place the animal in. The scene should look like the place where that animal would naturally live. The scene could include details such as water, dirt and plants.
Interest In Subject Was Surprising
"Trying to make something dead look like something that's living again takes ... skill," said Claire Knapp, a junior. She was drawn to learning about taxidermy after taking a course in anatomy, where she learned about the structure of living things. 
For the students who didn't make it into the the class this first year, there's always next school year.
"I never thought that it would be this popular " Tubbs said. He did not think there would be this much interest in the course. "It's just really cool for me, doing taxidermy and, as a teacher, to see the interest that we have with this class."
      
      