Have you met the bugs that share your home?
No? Well, pull up a chair and get acquainted. Scientists have just completed a study of creepy crawlies from hundreds of households across the country. They found that more than 600 types of insects and spiders live alongside us in our homes.
Both insects and spiders are what scientists call arthropods. They are classified that way because both have segmented bodies and hard outer skeletons called exoskeletons.
Whether you know it or not, you are already on close terms with these creatures. They live alongside you and affect your health, even if you do not notice them.
Q-Tip Size Samples Are Taken From Over 700 Homes
Biologist Anne Madden led the new study. We may not think about or even see the arthropods in our homes, Madden said, "but they're there."
Madden and her team gathered samples from more than 700 houses, located in every state except Hawaii and Alaska. Each contributor only needed to provide a tiny amount of dust — one clump from inside the house, and another from outside. Each sample could fit on the head of a Q-Tip.
A world of knowledge was contained within those bits of dust, though. After all, dust is not just dust. It contains bits of bug legs and wings and tiny bits of insect feces. By studying the material in each sample, Madden was able to determine which creatures lived in that particular household.
Madden was particularly interested in finding out how many different kinds of bugs live among us. Some households she examined had bugs from as many as 45 different genera. A genus is a grouping of related species. For example, lions, tigers and leopards are all in the same genus. 
Of course, houses with a greater number of genera do not necessarily have more bugs. They just have more kinds of bugs.
Complete Food Webs Were Found
Madden's study shows that entire arthropod food webs are present in our homes. A food web is a system of interconnected food chains. A food chain is the link between hunter and prey, or between a particular plant and the animal that eats that plant. 
For example, tiny plant-eating aphids live in many of the homes Madden studied. At the same time, ladybugs that eat the aphids are also in the same homes. 
Madden's study also helps show where particular arthropods are most likely to be found. For example, it shows that cockroaches tend to stay in warm, southern climates. On the other hand, ladybugs are more plentiful in northern homes. Dust mites like a moist climate. Houses with pets tend to have a broader range of bugs, as do ones with basements.
Study Could Help Us Live Healthier Lives
This information could help doctors working to understand allergies, according to Madden. Dust mites are a common cause of asthma, as is cockroach waste. "It's good to think about what unexpected arthropods we might be interacting with," Madden said. Knowing which bugs are in our homes might help us "figure out how they might be affecting our health."
Some bugs may make our homes better without us noticing — for example, spiders that eat other bugs. Some might be accidental intruders, brought in on a sleeve or a dog's paw. They are as eager to leave our homes as we are to kick them out. Still others may live their entire lives right next to us, without us ever noticing.
We think of our homes as the place we know best, Madden said. Yet, we "still have so much to learn about what's going on inside of them."
      
      