Have you met the bugs you live with?
No? Well, pull up a chair and get to know them. Scientists have just completed a study of bugs from hundreds of houses across the country. They found that more than 600 types of bugs share our homes with us.
The study looked at both insects and spiders. Both are what scientists call arthropods. 
Whether you know it or not, your home is filled with these creatures. They live beside you even if you do not notice them. They could be making you sick.
Scientist Anne Madden led the new study. 
We may not notice the arthropods in our homes, Madden said. "But they're there."
Bugs Can Live In Tiny Clumps Of Dust
Madden and her team studied the bugs in more than 700 houses. The homes are located in every state except Hawaii and Alaska. 
All Madden and her team needed was two tiny clumps of dust from each home. One clump was taken from inside the house. The other was from outside the home. 
A great deal was learned from those tiny bits of dust. After all, dust is not just dust. It contains bits of bug legs, bug wings and bug poo. By studying the dust, Madden was able to see what kinds of bugs lived in a particular home.
Madden wanted to find out how many different kinds of bugs live in our homes. It turns out there are hundreds of different kinds. 
Some houses Madden studied had as many as 45 different kinds of bugs. Of course, that does not mean they had more bugs than other homes. They simply had more types of bugs.
Entire Food Webs Exist In Our Homes
Madden's study shows that entire food webs can be found in our homes. A food web is a set of interconnected food chains. A food chain is the link between hunter and hunted. It is also the link between a plant and a plant-eater. 
For example, plant-eating aphids live in many of the homes Madden studied. So do ladybugs that eat the aphids. 
Madden's study shows where particular arthropods are most likely to be found. For example, it shows that cockroaches like warm, southern climates. On the other hand, ladybugs are more common in northern homes. Dust mites like rainy weather. 
Houses with pets usually have more kinds of bugs. So do ones with basements.
Study Could Help Doctors Keep Us Healthy
This information could help doctors treat allergies, Madden said. For example, dust mites are a common cause of asthma. So is cockroach poo. It would be useful for doctors to know if those bugs are likely to be in a patient's home.
Not all bugs are bad for us. Some bugs may make our homes better without us noticing. For example, spiders eat other bugs. 
Some might be in our homes by accident. They could have been brought in on a sleeve or a dog's paw. They are as eager to leave our homes as we are to kick them out. 
Still others bugs may live their entire lives right next to us. We may never notice them, but our home is their entire world.
We think of our homes as the place we know best, Madden said. Yet, we "still have so much to learn about what's going on inside of them."
      
      