The world’s only alpine parrot is threatened with extinction in New Zealand. Its numbers have dropped drastically in the face of threats from non-native predators and human development.
The kea is the world’s only mountain-dwelling parrot and is one of the most intelligent species of bird, known for its playfulness and novelty-seeking nature.
The birds, which are considered to be a pest by many New Zealanders, are only found in the mountains of the South Island.
Kea Numbers Are "Crashing"
Conservationists have begun raising the alarm after years of “crashing” population numbers. The wild kea population is now estimated to be as low as 1,000 to 5,000 across an area of more than 13,000 square miles.
Recent studies from the Kea Conservation Trust have found that two-thirds of all chicks never reach fledgling stage. They are being eaten by stoats, rats and possums, which grab them from their ground-dwelling nests.
“Kea are one of the most maligned of New Zealand birds, as well as one of our most loved,” said Tamsin Orr-Walker, chairman of the Kea Conservation Trust.
“One of the most interesting things about kea is they are one of the few wild species that seek out humans — that is really rare," Orr-Walker said. The birds' curious nature is what is "getting them into trouble because a lot of the ways humans interact with them is endangering their survival.”
Threats Come From Varied Sources
Orr-Walker said the threat to kea was threefold. It comes from introduced, non-native species, lead-poisoning from old-fashioned alpine dwellings such as huts and shearing sheds, and from their contacts with humans.
Lead poisoning is a particularly difficult problem to tackle, Orr-Walker said. There are thousands of old buildings dotting remote parts of the South Island that could poison curious kea. The effects of lead poisoning on the birds are disastrous and include brain damage and death.
“We can educate people about how to behave responsibly with kea, and we can enclose protected environments, but the lead poisoning is hard,” kea expert Josh Kemp said. “And we can’t afford any kea losses at this stage.”
Love Them Or Hate Them
New Zealanders are divided between those who enjoy the cheeky parrot’s animated nature and those who curse its destructive habits. The birds sometimes damage cars, tents or buildings in alpine environments. They are also known for attacking farm animals and for habitually stealing food.
An estimated 150,000 kea were killed from the 1860s onward due to a government bounty introduced after conflict with sheep farmers. The Department of Conservation and the Kea Conservation Trust continue to record intentional kea deaths each year, in which the birds are either shot, bludgeoned, or poisoned by humans. However, targeted kea deaths are thought to be greatly underreported, because the birds are a protected species.
“Education efforts have gone a long way towards New Zealanders learning to love and respect the kea," Kemp said. However, "if the kea cause financial loss or begin to hit people’s bottom line, that is when we are still hearing stories of kea being killed.”
      
      