SAN FRANCISCO, Calif. — The Ferry Building here rises over the San Francisco Bay, and has long been a symbol of survival.

The building withstood the great 1906 earthquake and fire that destroyed much of the city 110 years ago today. It was a gathering place back then for people who had nowhere else to go. In 1989, it served the same purpose after an earthquake brought  down a section of the Bay Bridge.
Today, city officials and engineers say the building faces another earthquake-related threat. So does the popular Embarcadero area that surrounds it.
New studies have looked at what might happen if a devastating earthquake hit. Researchers say a vast sea wall along the Embarcadero could be shoved toward the bay by more than several feet, taking with it some of San Francisco’s most famous and expensive real estate.
Area Most At Risk Is One Of City's Most Beautiful
Engineers say a beautiful three-mile stretch of the Embarcadero between Fisherman’s Wharf and ATandT Park is at risk. This is one of the city’s most bustling areas. Historic streetcars glide down the road, sharing the waterside street with tourists. Joggers and foodies sample the various eateries.
A report by the Port of San Francisco released last week outlined a grim scenario if the sea wall gives way: a disrupted path to the ferries; damaged piers, wharves and the buildings on top of them; distorted streetcar tracks; big cracks in the Embarcadero roadway and walking path; and disrupted utilities. A damaged sea wall could also be further eroded by waves and tides.
The cost for securing the wall was placed at roughly $2 billion to $3 billion.
“This is one of the most critical pieces of infrastructure in the city, and most people don’t even know it even exists,” said Patrick Otellini, San Francisco’s chief resilience officer. “We can’t be afraid to have the conversation. We have to talk about the risk.”
Sea Wall Protects City From Floods
The sea wall vulnerability is particularly frustrating. Over the years, officials have worked to improve the seismic safety of individual buildings along the Embarcadero.
The sea wall was built to expand San Francisco’s ancient coastline. It once went as far inland as the Transamerica Pyramid near Chinatown, two-fifths of a mile from today’s waterfront.
By reclaiming the tidal marsh as land, San Francisco was able to build out over deeper bay waters, constructing port facilities for large ships. To this day, the sea wall provides protection against floods.
“If there wasn’t anything built there, that wouldn’t be a problem,” said Steven Reel, a professional engineer with the port. “But we’ve got utilities through that zone. We have a beautiful and important promenade that’s built in that zone. The Embarcadero corridor is important.”
Engineers Are Still Looking For Answers
It was only recently that officials began to be aware of the sea wall’s vulnerability.
“The overall risk: It’s greater than we previously thought,” Reel said.
At risk is all of the property along the Port of San Francisco and the rent, income and wages it brings in.  The waterfront is a major draw for millions of tourists, who annually bring in about $11 billion.
Solutions are still being formulated. One idea is to stiffen the mud supporting the rock wall by injecting it with cement — kind of like forcing down bits of fruit into a dish of Jell-O. “You put enough fruit down there, and you’ve firmed it enough … and you really stabilize the rock,” Reel said.
Officials are also suggesting updating or replacing frail concrete supports that hold up the wharves and wall.
Officials Have To Find A Way To Pay
Even if they come up with a plan, officials will still have to find a way to pay for it. San Francisco has begun a major effort to update about 5,000 apartment buildings that are at risk of being destroyed during a major earthquake. That effort took more than 10 years of planning and delicate negotiations with property owners and renters.
On the horizon is another looming problem: rising sea waters prompted by climate change. Dealing with that could cost an additional $2 billion.
“If you were to do nothing, somewhere in between 2070, 2100, the old shoreline is going to be back,” Reel said. “And now with sea-level rise, the sea is trying to take that land back.”
      
      