WASHINGTON, D.C. — As the Earth grows warmer, huge fires like the one still burning in northern Canada are becoming more common.

Earlier this year, large wildfires broke out on opposite ends of the world — Tasmania and Oklahoma-Kansas. Last year, Alaska and California pushed the U.S. to a record 10 million acres burned. Massive fires hit Siberia, Mongolia and China last year. Brazil's fire season has increased by a month over the past 30 years.
It got so bad that in 2009, Australia added a bright red "catastrophic" to its fire warning index. The index measures the danger of fire in Australian forests. It combines a record of dryness, based on rainfall and evaporation, with wind speed, temperature and humidity.
"The warmer it is, the more fires we get," says Mike Flannigan, a professor of wildland fire at the University of Alberta, in Canada.
Last week, temperatures pushed past 90 degrees Fahrenheit (mid-30s Celsius) in Alberta. That is unusual for May in northern Canada.
How Warming Wreaks Havoc
Many factors contribute to the increase in big fires, Flannigan and several experts say. They include climate change, the way people use land, and firefighting methods that leave more fuel — trees and brush — to burn.
But the temperature one stands out, Flannigan says.
"The Alberta wildfires are an excellent example of what we're seeing more and more of: Warming means snow melts earlier, soils and vegetation dries out earlier, and the fire season starts earlier. It's a train wreck," University of Arizona climate scientist Jonathan Overpeck says.
Longer Fire Season, More Big Blazes
Worldwide, the length of Earth's fire season increased nearly 19 percent from 1979 to 2013. That's according to a study by Mark Cochrane, a professor of fire ecology at South Dakota State University.
Fires had steadily been increasing for years. Then, in the late 1990s and early 2000s, "we've suddenly been hit with lots of these large fires we can't control," Cochrane says.
In terms of land burned, the worldwide total may be dropping because of better firefighting. But in North America and Siberia, "fires have grown quite a bit due to warming," says Columbia University scientist Park Williams. "My estimate is that global warming has been responsible for about half of this increase."
For the entire U.S., the average number of acres burned in wildfires has more than doubled. About 3 million acres burned in the mid-1980s. That compares to 7 million acres now, according to a study of government information by The Associated Press.
A study by Flannigan and University of Victoria climate scientist Andrew Weaver found that climate change caused by humans has had "a detectable influence" on a dramatic increase in wildfires in Canada. They did the study 12 years before the recent Alberta blazes. Flannigan said the area burned in Canada has doubled since the 1970s. "And we think that's due to climate change."
"Globally, we are seeing more fires, bigger fires, more severe fires," says Kevin Ryan. He is a retired U.S. Forest Service scientist who is now a fire expert. Ryan recently worked in Indonesia, where fires were big last year.
Link Between Lightning And Fires
Fires in some places, such as Indonesia and Canada, are bad when there's an El Nino. That occurs when a warming of parts of the Pacific changes weather worldwide because it triggers drought in those regions, Ryan says. In Indonesia, changes in land use are a bigger factor than climate, he says.
But elsewhere, it's temperature and moisture, too much of one and not enough of the other, scientists said. As the air warms, it gets "more efficient at sucking the moisture out of the fuels," which makes them more likely to burn, Flannigan says.
Lightning is another factor. A study found that lightning increases 12 percent with every degree Celsius and that can trigger more fires. Flannigan said there's evidence of fire-triggered clouds in Alberta causing at least two more fires because of lightning.
The U.S. National Academy of Sciences determined that "climate warming has resulted in longer fire seasons." But other factors, such as the way fires are fought and land use, make it difficult to scientifically say individual fires and regional fires were caused by climate change, the report and other scientists said.
More devastating wildfires are sure to come, says Weaver, the Canadian climate scientist.
      
      