A few years ago, Mercedes Dorame got a gift from her father. It was a computer disc with photos of her family. She had never seen some of the people before. 
The gift was more than just photos. It gave Dorame a new way to understand her family history. Her family is part of the Gabrielino-Tongva tribe. This Native American tribe has been based in the Los Angeles area for many years. Los Angeles is a big city in Southern California. 
The Gabrielino-Tongva tribe is not recognized by the government. When tribes are recognized, they can get benefits. They may get reservation land to live on. They may also get money for certain projects. The Gabrielino-Tongva is one of hundreds of tribes that are not recognized. So they do not receive these benefits. 
No Place To Come Together
Dorame said the group has had problems because they do not have reservation land. They do not have a place to come together, she said. This has been hard for the tribe, she said.
When she got the photos, Dorame started an art project. She projected the photos around her apartment, the way movies are projected onto a screen at the movie theater. Then she took pictures. She called the result “Living Proof.” It brings her family’s history into her world today.
She Shows Tribe's Past And Present
Dorame said she took the photos to bring attention to her tribe. The tribe has survived for many years. It has kept its traditions over time. This was not always easy. Native Americans were not treated very well in the past. They were sometimes pressured to give up their culture.
Her photos also show different ideas of who Native Americans are. Many people picture a certain kind of person when they think about Native Americans, Dorame said. However, this is not based on facts. Instead, it is based on a common type of Native American character. This character is often used in movies and TV shows.
Dorame hopes people will be interested in her photos. Then, they may be interested in her tribe, too. She wants them to learn about the tribe’s past and present. 
Most importantly, she wants people to know that her tribe still exists, she said.
      
      