WASHINGTON, DC – In 2015 there was a movie called "The Martian." It was about an astronaut who is all alone on the planet Mars. The only people who can save him work for the U.S. space agency. The agency is called NASA.
In the movie, NASA asks other countries for help. Together they think of new ways to travel through space. They work together to save the astronaut.
This is a lot like how real space travel works. 
Mars is a long way from Earth and no people have ever been there. NASA wants to change that.
First Stop: Space Station
NASA wants to send people to Mars. We have a plan to do this by the year 2040. I currently work at NASA as a chief scientist. It will not be easy and we will need help.
The plan begins with the International Space Station, or ISS. The ISS is a large space station and science lab. Fifteen countries help run it.
The ISS is close to Earth and not very far into space. Astronauts will soon have to travel beyond the ISS. Each trip will take them farther from Earth and closer to Mars. 
There are also companies that work with NASA. Some companies send rockets with supplies to the ISS. Others will soon bring astronauts from Earth to the ISS.
Companies Help NASA
These companies do easy things for NASA. That lets NASA solve the harder problems about getting to Mars. 
We are not going to Mars just because we can. We are going to learn new things. What we learn about Mars will tell us more about life on Earth.
We know water was once on Mars. Water helped create life on Earth. We want to know if water helped create life on Mars too. If so, we want to study it. 
Smart People Will Team Up
Sending people to Mars will also make many smart people work together. It will make them have new ideas. They will invent new technologies that can help people in space and on Earth.
One example is the water cleaning system used on the ISS. It can also make clean water on Earth. It helps many people who need clean water. 
The astronaut in "The Martian" showed great courage. He explored Mars when he was all alone. He never gave up. NASA plans to be just like that movie astronaut. NASA will never give up on its plan to send people to Mars.

Ellen R. Stofan is chief scientist at NASA.

      
      