NEW YORK, N.Y. — It was an amazing discovery. Remains in a cave in Indonesia, the giant island nation north of Australia, showed a recent relative of modern humans that stood about 3 feet tall. The creatures were quickly nicknamed "hobbits."
Evidence at the time showed that they had survived until just 12,000 years ago. The hobbits appeared to be the most recent human relatives to die out.
Now, 10 years after they made headlines, they've lost that title. New research shows they may have disappeared much earlier. They may have disappeared about 50,000 years ago, which is even before another early human species, called Neanderthals, did.
Did Humans Cause Hobbits' Extinction?
The new date raises questions about whether the arrival of modern humans caused the death of the hobbits. Either way, the discovery is of great importance, said Matt Tocheri of Lakehead University in Ontario, Canada.
He and others wrote the new paper with three of the researchers who first reported the discovery in 2004. The new paper was released Wednesday by a magazine for scientists called Nature.
The hobbits are formally known as Homo floresiensis. They are named after their home on the Indonesian island of Flores. They had small, chimp-sized brains, and their skulls resembled Homo erectus, another human relative that lived in Africa and Asia. But the hobbits also had long arms and short legs. These were similar to much older human ancestors, best known by the skeleton that scientists found in 1974 and named Lucy.
Tools Also Found In Cave
It's not clear where the hobbits fit in the human family tree. They may have descended from taller ancestors who shrank because of their isolation on the island. Some scientists think they were diseased modern humans rather than a separate species. However, experts said it is not a very popular view and several said the new dates make it less likely.
Hobbits evidently made the stone tools that were found along with skeletal remains in the Liang Bua cave. The new study says the remains are 100,000 to 60,000 years old. The tools and other artifacts range in age from about 190,000 to 50,000 years.
Researchers revised the original age estimates after new excavations showed more about the history of the cave. Soil and rocks in the cave were sampled to date the artifacts and bones.
Going The Same Way As Neanderthals
"I think it's a terrific paper," said Bernard Wood of George Washington University, who had no part in the research. "They have done everything you can possibly ask."
It is thought that the death of the Neanderthals in Europe and Asia about 40,000 years ago was caused by the arrival of modern humans. Did the arrival of humans cause the end for the hobbits, as well? 
Meanwhile, On Neighboring Australia ...
There's no evidence that modern humans occupied Flores until long after the hobbits were gone. However, they are known to have lived not far away, in Australia, some 50,000 years ago — right about the time the hobbits evidently disappeared.
"It is certainly suggestive," said anthropologist Karen Baab of Midwestern University in Arizona. She studies the hobbits but didn't help with the new work.
Richard Roberts of the University of Wollongong in Australia, who helped write the study, said that it is an idea that should be considered. However, "solid evidence is needed in order to demonstrate it," he said. "One thing we can be certain of, it will definitely be a major focus of further research."
      
      