Picture the woods in early spring when trees are just starting to sprout fresh leaves. Young deer munch on the pale green leaves as they slowly make their way across the sun-dappled forest floor.
Behind that peaceful exterior, however, a battle of wits is raging. Despite not having a brain or much of a central nervous system, the trees are pretty wily.
Scientists in Leipzig, Germany, have uncovered the brilliant way that wild maple and beech trees protect themselves. The trees are able to figure out when deer are eating them — and then do something to make sure the critters do not return for another snack.
Fighting To Reach Adulthood
The stakes are particularly high for young trees. Too much nibbling will make them stunted or condemn them to death. If they can head off the threat from deer early, the saplings have a chance of making it to adulthood.
So the trees have evolved a complex set of responses specifically to deal with threats from leaf-eating animals. Whenever a branch is snipped — by a deer, insect or human — trees release "wound hormones" called jasmonates. These chemicals help with the recovery process. They also play a role in interplant communication — when one plant releases jasmonates, their neighbors start to ramp up their defenses against disease and insect attacks as well. It is like a forest-wide alarm system.
The trees studied in Leipzig went beyond this, however. They seemed able to recognize specific threats and tailored their response accordingly. When a deer was eating their branches, the trees released a second set of chemicals — first the hormone salicylic acid, then bitter chemicals called tannins. The salicylic acid boosts protein production, allowing the trees to regrow what was lost, and the tannins make the trees distasteful to deer, which prevents further snacking.
Another Defensive Mechanism
"On the other hand, if a leaf or a bud snaps off without a roe deer being involved, the tree stimulates neither its production of the salicylic acid signal hormone nor the tannic substances. Instead, it predominantly produces wound hormones," said Bettina Ohse, who led the new study.
To test whether this was truly a tailored response to a deer threat, the scientists in Leipzig attempted to outsmart the trees. They simulated deer snacking by clipping the trees, then trickling deer saliva onto the broken branches. The fake deer attack sparked the same defensive response as an actual bite from a deer, suggesting that trees are able to recognize deer saliva and respond to it. Now, Ohse and her team are performing the experiment on other tree species to see whether some have better defensive mechanisms than others.
      
      