Buenos Aires Jockey Club, in Argentina, looks like a palace. The country's top horse racers learn their craft at the club.
Horse racers are also known as jockeys. Many jockeys were born poor in the countryside of Argentina. Buenos Aires Jockey Club is different from the homes they grew up in.
If the boys become jockeys, they can earn a lot of money racing.
Turns Riders Into Stars
The Buenos Aires Jockey Club has turned riders like Lucas Berticelli into stars. He has already won many races. He is only 23 years old.
"This is how I have earned money to live," he says. "Before, I didn't have a penny. My mom hardly gave me enough for my bus fare."
For winning a race, a young jockey can win up to $300.
But they dream of winning much more.
One of the world's most famous horse races is the Gran Premio Carlos Pelligrini. Whoever wins this race can earn millions of dollars.
Strict Training
Before they can do that, they have to train for 18 months, and it is very hard. 
The young boys must follow strict rules. 
Young jockeys also must keep their weight under 110 pounds. The lighter the jockeys are, the faster the horses can run.
While training, the young boys care for the racehorses at the club's stables. They are paid about $2 a day for this job.
There is a sign hanging in the training center that says "Horses win races." 
In other words, the jockeys are not the center of attention. The horses are. 
Experience In The Saddle
The school's leader is 67-year-old Hector Libre, a former jockey himself. The jockeys must remain humble, or they will fail, he says.
The jockeys Libre has trained have won 8,600 races in the past 12 years, he says.
Some jockeys are only 15 years old when they enter the school. Most of them already have experience on the saddle.
"At the age of 10 I was already riding in 'cuadreras,'" says Kevin Banegas, who is 16 years old now.
Cuadreras are popular in the Argentina countryside. They are fast, short races through the dirt roads of villages.
Adults place bets on the young boys. They make money off of them when they win.
There are many dangers to this high-speed horse racing.
Exercising And Caring For The Horses
As a riding student at the jockey club, Kevin gets up at dawn and puts on his riding jacket and helmet. Then he jumps on a chestnut-brown horse to exercise it.
Other riders practice indoors on a wooden horse that moves and shakes like a real horse. Libre calls out instructions as they ride.
At the age of 19, Gustavo Villalba has already won 150 races.
"I don't want to be the Messi of jockeys," he says. Lionel Messi is a superstar soccer player from Argentina.
He would like to earn enough money to buy himself his own house, he says.
When he isn't in the saddle, he is feeding, washing and brushing the horses.
"I stroke them. I talk to them," he says.
"If they get nervous, they don't race well."
The same goes for the riders.
Don't Be Afraid
Martin Gonzalez grew up caring for sheep in the countryside. He's now 25 years old and has won 140 races. 
He remembers how his first racehorse threw him off the saddle. It broke his collar bone.
Fellow jockey Lucas Lopez warns, "You cannot ride if you are afraid."
      
      