The disappearance of snakes’ arms and legs is complicated. It came from their genes. These are the instructions every animal has for how its body should grow and develop. Genes are passed on from parent to child.
Snakes came from an ancestor that looked like a lizard. A team of scientists is hoping to understand how and why snakes ended up not growing legs. The team did not use snakes for the study, though. Instead, the scientists used mice.
Technology has made it so scientists can edit genes. They use a tool called CRISPR to do it. Axel Visel is a scientist. He studies genomes, which are complete sets of genes in a living thing.
Switching ZRS In Mice
Snakes have a part of their genome called ZRS. People and other animals have it, too. ZRS plays a part in the process that grows legs and arms. Visel's team took the snake ZRS. Then they put it into mice. They replaced the mice ZRS with snake ZRS. They also took human ZRS. They put that into different mice.
The mice in the experiment grew. The mice with the human ZRS had normal arms and legs. The mice with the snake ZRS did not. Their legs were very small. They looked like they were not growing like the rest of the mouse.
The scientists said the snake ZRS had problems. It did not work like the mice ZRS.
The team said that snakes did not lose their legs because of this ZRS. Instead, they said the ZRS mattered less once snakes had no legs. When animals have a trait that causes them to not live as long, that trait dies out. The bad ZRS did not hurt snakes because they did not need legs.
Testing On Animals OK In This Case
The study involved testing on animals. Because of this, a group needed to decide whether it was OK to do. It can seem cruel to test on animals. The group decided that the experiment was not cruel. The results could help people. Visel says that there is no alternative in these kinds of studies. Computers will not have the same results.
Arthur Caplan studies these kinds of questions. He thinks about whether testing on animals is right or wrong. He says we need to talk more about gene-editing.
One day, scientists hope to change genes in people. If they do that, they might be able to remove diseases caused by genes. They can help people. Still, Caplan says, they need to try it in mice first.
      
      