Fighting crime is expensive. Police patrols cost money. Lawyers, judges and courts are also expensive. Experts have started looking for other crime-fighting tools. How about trees and some grass? They are cheap, and now the government wants to know if they can help to fight crime.
Experts are experimenting with turning empty lots into fields of green in three big cities across the United States. They hope to learn more about the popular idea of cleaning troubled neighborhoods to prevent crime.
Marc Zimmerman is a professor at the University of Michigan. He is leading the study. He thinks it is worth exploring the power of plants.
“If you live in a bad neighborhood and you plant some trees and do some community revitalization, do you think it will make a difference?” Zimmerman asked. “A lot of skeptics will say, ‘Well, duh! Of course it does.’ And others might say, ‘Huh? How can that make a difference?’ But we do not really know. It has not been adequately tested.”
Compare Garden Spaces, Empty Lots
Zimmerman is working with scientists from the University of Pennsylvania and Rutgers University. They will study projects in Michigan, Ohio and New Jersey.
The experiments will compare community gardens and other popular public spaces with empty lots. The spaces will be randomly chosen to become either plots of grass or spaces that are not cared for at all.
The University of Pennsylvania is also studying the link between troubled areas in cities and the amount of crime. It began two years ago and will start reporting its results later this year.
Scientists and experts began looking more closely at how people live in bad neighborhoods in the 1990s. At the same time, they also started studying a theory that run-down buildings and abandoned lots lead to fear and crime.
Big Project Turns Big City Green
In 2000, Philadelphia became home to one of the first greening projects that focused on poor neighborhoods. The program was led by the Pennsylvania Horticultural Society. Three years later, the city paid to bring the program to more people.
Robert Grossmann works for the horticultural society. He said he expected one-third of empty lots in Philadelphia would be cleaned and greened by the end of this year.
Experts at the University of Pennsylvania became interested in the program. They started to wonder about its effect on crime.
A study led by scientists at the University of Pennsylvania found that turning empty lots green often led to fewer gun crimes in the city. They studied information from neighborhoods where lots were newly planted and compared it with lots that were left untouched. They found that citywide gun crimes dropped by almost one-tenth, even though reports of bad behavior went up.
Charles Branas worked on the study. The increase in crime reports, Branas said, came from concerned people who lived near freshly planted spaces. They were more likely to call the police and complain about any trouble, he said. “If you clean a space, people will want to protect it.’’
More People Protect Their Neighborhood
Lieutenant John Walker runs the detective department of the police in West Philadelphia. He said the study's results were helpful and many of the fixes were “common sense.”
“If you clean things up and make things look good, people are more likely to take care of their neighborhood,” Walker said. “People are less likely to hang in those areas where the streets are maintained. You will see less kids hanging on the corners.”
Michelle Kondo is a scientist with the U.S. Forest Service. She worked on a study in Youngstown, Ohio, which used to be a busy steel town. Crime went down around empty land that was improved in the town. People there noticed.
Barbara Cole lives in Youngstown. She said that when abandoned homes in her neighborhood were replaced with beautiful green grass and trees, rowdy young people suddenly left the street corners.
“It is nicer to look at beautiful fields than raggedy houses,” Cole said. “To me, it makes sense ... It’s worth the money,” she added. “It will get people motivated. People will want to keep it up.”

Simone Weichselbaum has spent more than a decade covering urban criminal justice issues.

      
      