Fighting crime is expensive. Cops are not cheap, and neither are lawyers, judges and all the other layers that make up the court system. But trees and some grass in comparison are a bargain, and now the federal government wants to know whether they are also good crime-fighting tools.
Experts from three major universities are conducting a series of experiments that will turn vacant lots into fields of green in three troubled cities. The study hopes to learn more about the popular idea of clearing away neighborhood trouble spots to prevent crime.
Marc Zimmerman, a professor at the University of Michigan School of Public Health, is leading the study. He thinks it’s worth exploring the power of plants.
Comparing Gardens With Vacant Lots
“If you live in a bad neighborhood and you plant some trees and do some community revitalization, do you think it will make a difference?” Zimmerman asked. “A lot of skeptics will say, ‘Well, duh! Of course it does.’ And others might say, ‘Huh? How can that make a difference?’ But we don’t really know. It hasn’t been adequately tested.”
Zimmerman is working with researchers from the University of Pennsylvania and Rutgers University. They will study greening projects in Flint, Michigan; Youngstown, Ohio, and Camden, New Jersey.
The experiments will compare community gardens and other popular public spaces with vacant lots. The spaces will be randomly assigned to become either plots of grass or “control” spaces that are not cared for at all.
The University of Pennsylvania is also studying the relationship between troubled areas in cities and the relationship with open-air drug markets and violence. It began two years ago and will start reporting its results later this year.
City Of Philadelphia Goes Green
Curiosity into how criminals and locals respond to a decayed neighborhood grew in the 1990s. At the same time, the "Broken Windows" theory of crime became popular with policing experts. The theory centers on the idea that run-down buildings and abandoned lots lead to fear and chaos.
In 2000, Philadelphia became home to one of the first mass-greening projects that focused on poor neighborhoods. The program was led by the Pennsylvania Horticultural Society. Three years later, the city paid to expand the program.
Robert Grossmann is a leader of the horticultural society. He said many of these spaces have benefited from steady taxpayer money since the early 2000s. Grossmann said he expected that one-third of empty lots in Philadelphia would be cleaned and greened by the end of 2016.
The program caught the interest of experts on crime and public health at the University of Pennsylvania. They started to wonder about its effect on violence.
Research Finds Fewer Gun Crimes
A study led by Charles Branas, an epidemiologist at Penn, and John MacDonald, a criminologist, reported that turning vacant lots green was associated with a lowered number of gun crimes across the city. They studied information from 1999 to 2008 in areas where lots were newly planted and compared it with lots that were left untouched. The researchers found that citywide, gun crimes dropped by almost one-tenth but reports of disorderly conduct increased. The increase in crime reports, Branas said, came from concerned people who lived near freshly planted spaces. They were more likely to call the police and complain about any trouble, he said. “If you clean a space, people will want to protect it.’’
Lieutenant John Walker runs the detective department of the police in West Philadelphia. He said the researchers’ findings were helpful, but those things were also “common sense.”
People Want To Take Care Of A Nice Place
“If you clean things up and make things look good, people are more likely to take care of their neighborhood,” Walker said. “People are less likely to hang in those areas where the streets are maintained. You will see less kids hanging on the corners.”
Michelle Kondo is a scientist with the U.S. Forest Service. She co-authored a recent study in Youngstown, which used to be a busy steel town. Crime decreased around empty land that had been rehabilitated, and people noticed.
Barbara Cole, a longtime Youngstown homeowner, said that when nearby abandoned homes were replaced with spaces of manicured grass and healthy trees, rowdy young people in her neighborhood suddenly left the street corners.
“It is nicer to look at beautiful fields than raggedy houses,” Cole said. “To me, it makes sense for the government to see how greening can improve things. It’s worth the money,” she added. “It will get people motivated. People will want to keep it up.”

Simone Weichselbaum has spent more than a decade covering urban criminal justice issues.

      
      