CHICAGO, Ill. — President Barack Obama is closing his presidency with a message of hope. Obama's eight years as president will come to an end next week. In a farewell speech Tuesday night, he challenged Americans to keep pushing to make the country better.
He said he was going from the nation’s most powerful job to being just a regular citizen. He said that this new role is just as important. 
Many Americans lost trust in politics during his time in office, Obama said. Still, he insisted that change happens when “ordinary people get involved, get engaged, and come together to demand it.”
“After eight years as your president, I still believe that,” he said, "and it’s not just my belief. It’s the beating heart of our American idea."
"Fired Up! Ready To Go!"
Obama was born and raised in Hawaii. Yet he decided to deliver his last major national speech from Chicago instead of the White House. He calls Chicago his adopted hometown. Presidential goodbyes have been some of the most famous speeches in American history. They date all the way back to George Washington. 
His farewell address was a celebration. Obama spoke in a large convention hall a few blocks from Grant Park in downtown Chicago. Eddie Vedder, a member of the band Pearl Jam, warmed up the crowd. Vedder, who is from Chicago, led the Chicago Children’s Choir in the song, “People Have the Power.” As Obama walked up to the stage, the crowd chanted, “Fired up! Ready to go!”
President Obama is just 55 years old. He is preparing for his life away from the White House. He is planning to work on many of the same issues he worked on while in office. These include the rights of blacks and other people of color, and opportunities for young people. 
Despite divisions in the United States, he is still one of the country's most popular political officials.
Obama Says There Are Still Opportunities To Be Created
Obama spoke only a little bit about his achievements as president. He talked about improving the economy and getting jobs to more people. He spoke about restoring relations with Cuba after a 50-year break. He also talked about the deal with Iran to slow its nuclear program. He pointed out his work for marriage equality and expanding healthcare to 20 million Americans who did not have insurance.
He also said those achievements were not his alone.
“You were the change. You answered people’s hopes, and because of you, by almost every measure, America is a better, stronger place than it was when we started,” he said.
He also was worried about how President-elect Donald Trump will handle many important issues. They include relationships with other countries, our nation's security and the economy.
He warned that American unity is in danger. The audience booed when he spoke about Trump taking office on January 20. He said that the country must create opportunities for everyone, or else people will be even more divided in the future.
Some Time To Reflect
Obama is the country's first black president. He spoke about the problems between blacks and whites, which he called “as old as our nation itself.” He called for greater understanding and acceptance of each other.
“Laws alone won’t be enough. Hearts must change,” he said.
After the president leaves office, he plans to take some time to “quiet” himself and think about the last eight years, said Valerie Jarrett. She is the president’s adviser and a family friend.
He wants to give Trump “room to do his homework,” Jarrett said.
At the same time, Obama knows that the country will pay attention to him and to what he says. If something bothers him, he might speak out.
For now, though, he hopes to leave a message of hope as he walks off the world stage.
      
      