CHICAGO, Ill. — President Barack Obama marked the end of his presidency Tuesday night with the same message of hope that launched him into the White House. He challenged Americans during his farewell address to renew their commitment to democratic values and persist in their optimism for change.
From his hometown of Chicago, Obama reflected on his transition from the nation’s most powerful office to one he has said is just as vital: citizen.
Americans have grown more cynical about politics during his time in office, Obama said. Nonetheless, he continued to insist that change results when “ordinary people get involved, get engaged, and come together to demand it.”
“After eight years as your president, I still believe that,” he said, "and it’s not just my belief. It’s the beating heart of our American idea — our bold experiment in self-government.”
Speech Set As A Celebration
Obama’s decision to deliver his final major national address from his adopted hometown instead of the White House was one of several flourishes on a tradition of presidential goodbyes. These farewells have been some of the most memorable speeches in presidential history, including George Washington’s Farewell Address and Dwight D. Eisenhower’s dark warning of the military-industrial complex.
Tuesday’s speech was intended to be a celebration. Obama spoke in a large convention hall a few blocks from Grant Park in downtown Chicago, the city where he said he found purpose in public life. Chicago-area native Eddie Vedder, a member of the band Pearl Jam, warmed up the crowd by leading the Chicago Children’s Choir in the song, “People Have the Power.” As the president made his way to the arena, staff members and supporters started up his campaign chant, “Fired up! Ready to go!”
The speech also reflected the unique situation Obama will confront as he leaves office. At just 55, he is preparing for an active post-presidency in which he will champion many of the same core issues he worked on in the White House, including minority rights and opportunities for young people. With an approval rating hovering just below 60 percent in many public surveys, he remains one of the nation’s most popular political figures.
"America Is A Better, Stronger Place"
Obama’s remarks touched only slightly on his record. He touted the end of the Great Recession, in which many Americans lost their jobs, and other economic gains. He spoke of foreign policy achievements such as restoring diplomatic ties to Cuba and a breakthrough with Iran to slow down its nuclear program. He also spoke about marriage equality in the United States and the expansion of access to health care for 20 million Americans who did not have insurance.
Yet he emphasized that those achievements were not his alone.
“You were the change. You answered people’s hopes, and because of you, by almost every measure, America is a better, stronger place than it was when we started,” he said.
Optimism, Yet Concern For The Country
He focused on his optimism about the future following the bitter campaign to replace him. He also showed concern about how President-elect Donald Trump will handle foreign relations, national security, the economy and other big-ticket issues.
He warned of further threats to American unity. The audience booed when he spoke of the peaceful transition of power set to take place next week. He called for a new commitment to creating opportunities for all, or else “the disaffection and division that has stalled our progress will only sharpen in years to come.”
The nation’s first black president reflected on racial tensions “as old as our nation itself,” and called for greater understanding and acceptance of the increasingly diverse nation.
“Laws alone won’t be enough. Hearts must change,” he said.
Senior advisers say Obama knows that many progressives, religious and ethnic minorities, and immigrants are feeling apprehensive about Trump because he was elected after promising to crack down on immigration. He also scrutinized the presence of Muslims in the United States, even proposing to ban them from entering the country.
Speechwriters Play An Important Role
The remarks were expected to be Obama’s final address in office, though he might still conduct one more news conference before he leaves the Oval Office on January 20.
Throughout his presidency, Obama has used his position to inspire, condemn and convince. He was always heavily involved in writing his biggest speeches, and his team of young speechwriters spent as much time with him as did more senior staff.
Chicago writers have always been at the heart of his craft. His earliest speechwriter was Chicago political mastermind David Axelrod, who helped him come up with the “yes, we can” slogan in his first election. In his second term, his head speechwriter has been Chicago native Cody Keenan, who worked with the president on the farewell address throughout the holidays.
Obama also worked on his speech for hours over the weekend, and he was still at work on it Monday as his team prepared for the trip to Chicago.
Time For Contemplation
After he leaves office, he plans to take some time to “quiet” himself and contemplate the last eight years, said Valerie Jarrett, the president’s longtime adviser and family friend. He wants to give Trump space to operate and friends say he will not comment on relatively small developments.
He wants to give Trump “room to do his homework,” Jarrett said.
At the same time, Obama is aware that he can command attention when the moment is right, and if some public event troubles him, he may speak out, he has said. For now, though, he hopes to leave a message of hope as he walks off the world stage.
It’s time for the “passing of the baton” to the next president, said Jen Psaki, the White House communications director.
      
      