Joel Quispe sells his art for pennies on the dollar. Each masterpiece is around 3 feet long and 2 feet wide. Each print requires many different types of ink and is meticulously designed and beautifully drawn. It is estimated that he has sold millions of dollars worth of his pieces over the past five years – all while locked in a Peruvian prison while his family on the outside runs the show.
He is a perfectionist who uses special paper, watermarks and typography. He has produced thousands of copies of his specialty: fake United States dollar bills. Quispe is a master counterfeiter.
According to police investigators, Quispe is the de facto leader of one of the four (perhaps more) sophisticated counterfeiting operations operating out of Lima, Peru. The United States Secret Service has declared it the world’s leading producer of counterfeit dollars.
Millions Of Fakes In The U.S.
“Since 2009, in our investigations with the secret service, we have seized about $75 million in fake bills,” said Walter Escalante, head of the Peruvian national police’s anti-fraud division. “We don’t know what percentage entered the U.S. illegally and has gone inside the financial system. We think that our $75 million is the better part of what has entered the U.S.”
Criminals suggested that Escalante was being optimistic and the actual production of counterfeit dollars was far higher. In a secret meeting with The Guardian in a hotel room in Lima, a veteran counterfeiter with more than 20 years in the business detailed how his gang alone was producing an average of $3 million to $5 million in fake $100 bills every week.
Asked how long it takes to fill an order for $5 million, “about a week," he said.
Discount For Repeat Customers
The counterfeiter, Geraldo Chavez (not his real name) said the typical customer bought between $10,000 and $15,000. The buyer paid 20 percent of face value if they were a repeat customer or 25 percent if they were new to the world of counterfeit.
Chavez pulled out a stack of freshly minted $100 bills. “These come from the north of Lima, where the factory is. Then they are brought to the center of Lima to enter the black market,” he added as he rubbed the bill with admiration. “The finishing touches are of the highest quality. These are made to be sent abroad.”
Chavez went on to demonstrate the “finishing touches” by which a counterfeit bill is able to pass smoothly into circulation. The final steps were meant to improve the raised lettering.
“The printer has to be skilled,” said Don Brewer. He spent 26 years with the U.S. Secret Service and became head of the agency’s anti-counterfeiting division. 
THE Place For Fake Driver's Licenses
In the United States and much of Europe, the sale, distribution, and use of offset printers are watched closely by anti-counterfeiting units. In Peru, however, the offset industry is a free-for-all. Entire neighborhoods are famous for being places to buy fake passports, fake driver’s licenses, invented university degrees, false job contracts, forged housing deeds and practically anything else under the sun.
In Peru, awareness of fake currency is so high that retail shops regularly provide cashiers with hole punchers. When a fake bill is received, the cashier quickly pops out a few holes before curtly returning the bill to a surprised client.
The profits from this business are huge – roughly $600,000 a week for his gang alone, Chavez said.
“They try to make the minimum investment possible,” said Escalante, the Peruvian police commander. “It’s not in their best interest to use expensive materials. And you have to remember, these bills are going to the United States, and in the U.S. the people have confidence in their bills. They don’t check as much.”
Fake Currency Worth More Than The Real Thing
Peruvian counterfeiters are so creative that even worthless currencies are brought back to life. The Venezuelan 10 Bolivar note has seen its value decrease over the past five years. For Peruvian counterfeiters, the Venezuelan currency is worth more than the money printed on it. They use the 10 Bolivar note as raw material to produce counterfeit bills.
According to the counterfeiters, every month millions of these fake dollars are smuggled out of Peru and into the United States by cash carriers known as “burriers."
“Most of the bills end up in the United States – they go through Mexico,” explained Chavez.
Secret Service On The Scene
In an attempt to break up the counterfeit gangs and reduce the flood of fake cash, the U.S. Secret Service set up a regional office in Lima three years ago to work closely with Peruvian police. But infiltrating the gangs is difficult. The counterfeiters live and work in small neighborhoods where outsiders are instantly noticed and often unwelcome. For the Peruvian police, widespread corruption in the judiciary and among their peers makes the battle against counterfeiters a weary fight.
Hoping to stop the counterfeiters, the U.S. Treasury has launched a seemingly endless string of redesigns to U.S. currency. They add features both public and private to make the bills ever harder to copy. Given the leap in printing technologies, however, the forgers fire back by reverse engineering those same features.
Brewer says the Peruvian bills never make it beyond the “retail” street level of commerce. Hi-tech magnetic ink allows counting machines at banks to instantly sort the authentic cash from the fake bills.
"Very Good Artists"
While police officials struggle to maintain an organized opposition to the flood of fake dollars, the counterfeiters continue to innovate. “They are very good artists,” said Reimundo Urcia Bernabe, a 20-year veteran of the Peruvian police.
Like many emerging artists, however, counterfeiters often have a huge ego, according to police investigators.
“I used to carry on about how good their product was and what a genius they were, and they would throw caution right out the window and ignore any suspicion,” Brewer said. “Counterfeiters are proud of their work, and I can’t tell you how useful that is when doing undercover work.”
      
      