In the United States, there are many mixed-race people. "Mixed-race" means someone comes from two or more different backgrounds. Mixed-race people often have parents with different skin colors. Their parents might come from different countries. What is it really like for kids who come from mixed backgrounds?
Douglas Smith, 15, The Overlake School
Douglas' mother is Korean and his father is white.
Douglas says he does not mind his mixed background. He does not think it's too important to who he is.
Douglas says he feels more connected with his white background, and to his white family. Much of his Korean family lives far away, and not all of them speak English. 
Aisha Marrakchi, 15, Roosevelt High School
Aisha feels different from other people.
“I don’t fit in,” she says.
Aisha’s mother was born in California. Her family has a Mexican background. Her father was born in Morocco, a country in Africa.
She wonders when she meets new people: “Will they think I’m weird?"
Sometimes, in the news and on television, Aisha hears people say hurtful things about Mexicans and Africans. It makes her sad. She feels they are talking about her.
Laila Pickett, 13, and Mia Pickett, 11, Seattle Girls' School
Laila and Mia's father is black, and their mother is half-black and half-white. The family thinks of itself as black, and African-American.
She does not know much about her white relatives because most of the family she grew up with is black. When people meet Laila, they say she is mixed.
Mia's skin is darker than her sister’s and people often do not realize that Mia is also mixed. 
Malik Abdul-Haqq, 18, Cleveland High School
Malik is really tall. It is confusing, he says, because his mom "is super tiny."
Malik’s mother is Asian. His father is black.
Malik comes from two very different backgrounds. His family celebrates them both equally.
Malik feels comfortable with who he is. “At the end of the day, I look black," he says.
But Malik does not let trouble bother him. One time, a woman called him a mean, hurtful name. He just laughed it off.
Milena Haile, 14, Garfield High School
Milena is in high school. 
Milena's family is from Africa. She is black. She feels different from someone who is black and born in the United States. “I’m just African,” she says. She does not see herself as American.
Milena thinks that skin color is not as important as people say. It is not as important as the food she eats, or the language she speaks. 
People look at your skin color and think they know everything about you, she says. That is just wrong.
      
      