JHELUM, Pakistan — Outside an old farmhouse nestled among green fields, two men lay on a cot. With their feet propped against a teal-painted wall, they stared at the sky, occasionally pointing upward and aiming a pair of binoculars.
The dark figure of a bird would suddenly be visible at a great height, gliding across the sky. Then it would fly out of view just as swiftly as it had appeared.
Breeding Big-Time Birds
Bird watching is not a simple pastime in these parts of Pakistan. In the sky that afternoon was a rare breed of racing pigeon worth hundreds of dollars — more than either man observing it earned in a month.
The pigeon is part of a stable of prized high-fliers belonging to Raja Iftikhar Ahmed. He is a businessman whose farm on the calm Jhelum River has become a breeding ground for big-time birds.
More than 300 birds flap and flutter inside a series of custom-built, walk-in coops on the roof of Iftikhar’s farmhouse. Tall and broad-shouldered, with a thick mustache, Iftikhar welcomed a visitor into the coops, its royal blue paint spattered with droppings.
Pigeons Are Popular in Pakistan
“To your eyes they look like normal pigeons,” he said, pulling down one bird with a gray-blue crown and white feathers. He held it by the claws and lifted a wing to reveal a deep streak of indigo dye that marks the bird as his.
There are believed to be thousands of “pigeon fanciers” across the United States. People train pigeons all over the world, but in Pakistan it boasts a particularly rich history. In the Mughal era, beginning 500 years ago, legend has it that carrier pigeons carried secret messages from kings to their men on the battlefield, or to their women in the palace.
Nowadays, pigeon breeding, or kabootar parwar, is more of a hobby. For men like Iftikhar, though, it is a serious one. In the endurance races popular here, pigeon enthusiasts train their birds to stay aloft for as long as possible — usually for more than 12 hours at a stretch — before returning home.
A High-Flying Sport
There is no starting line, and all the birds take off at a scheduled time from their own perches, often many miles apart. The breeders watch from the ground with binoculars, but often the pigeons are out of sight. The moment one returns to its perch, the clock stops; landing anywhere else can mean that the bird is out of the running — if the bird is caught.
Judges circulate among the breeders and perform spot checks, but the competitions are based largely on the honor system. Each pigeon wears a band around one leg with its owner’s phone number, to help track strays.
“They are trained not to land anywhere else,” Iftikhar said. “This is a matter of respect for our sport.”
"This Is More Than A Game"
Three times, he has won an annual tournament here. Five years ago he was runner-up in an international competition hosted by the United Arab Emirates, when his birds flew for a combined 1,082 hours over 11 days.
Once someone asked Iftikhar to part with one of his best fliers, a blue-headed female Sialkot pigeon named Topiwali for a brand new Toyota. Topiwali meaning “the one with the cap.” He declined the offer.
“This is more than a game for us,” he said. “It’s a tradition.”
Give This Pigeon A Massage!
Iftikhar, 44, learned the pastime from his father, who picked it up while working for a royal family in the Middle East. When Iftikhar moved to Britain about two decades ago, he tried to breed pigeons on the roof of his home outside London. He found the wet, gray conditions to be less than ideal.
His flock seems to do better on the rooftop in Jhelum, a farming area two hours outside Islamabad. On Iftikhar’s 10 acres of land, where he grows wheat and raises cattle, several men tend to the coop or let the birds out for practice runs.
The afternoon before a recent race, his best birds — including three that were gifts to him from Bahraini royalty — were resting under a hand-painted sign that read, “Alhamdulillah” or “Praise be to Allah.” Later, as part of the pre-race routine, they would have their wings massaged.
Pigeons On Steroids?
Downstairs, an elderly man ground up food for the birds in a large pot. The secret of a successful pigeon breeder, Iftikhar said, is if you fed the birds well, they could fly for hours and hours without tiring.
He was secretive about his prize-winning formula, but it was a mixture of gram, millet, almonds, cardamom, herbs and, at times, substances that have been banned from other sports.
Unlocking a cabinet, he pulled out a sheet of white tablets that he said were steroid pills. A steroid is a drug. They would be ground up into the mixture, which would be shaped into pellets and fed to the birds.
"My Wife Hates It"
“The steroids keep them from getting thirsty, so they can fly for 10 or 12 hours,” he explained. “It’s allowed. So are muscle relaxers. You can do anything you want in this sport, really."
Iftikhar allowed that to settle in for a moment, then broke into a grin — a subtle acknowledgment that the diet might not exactly be healthy for the birds. Pakistan does not have much of an animal rights movement, but someone closer to home fervently opposes Iftikhar’s peculiar, expensive hobby.
“My wife hates it,” he said with a laugh.
      
      