The Super Bowl is  February 5.  It will be between two teams playing at their best. 
The New England Patriots will play the Atlanta Falcons.
Atlanta is led by star quarterback Matt Ryan. The Falcons scored the most points in the 2016 season. They are a good offensive team. They score a lot of points.
The Patriots is a good defensive team. They allow the fewest points. They are led by quarterback Tom Brady. He has appeared in the Super Bowl six times. 
The two teams will make for an interesting game.
New England has won nine games straight. 
Atlanta has won its past six in a row. They scored 33 or more points in each game.
Ryan Feels Super
"We'll enjoy this," Ryan said. It is his first time in the Super Bowl. 
The Patriots will be seeking their fifth championship. This will be the team's ninth time in the Super Bowl. They won it in 2002, 2004, 2005 and 2015.
The Falcons have never won the Super Bowl. This will be Atlanta's second trip to the big game. It lost to Denver in 1999.
Matt Ryan could help them win.
In the National Football Conference championship game, he led Atlanta past the Green Bay Packers. Ryan completed 27 of 38 passes. He threw four touchdowns.
"We did exactly what we've been doing all year ,and it feels really good," Ryan said. "We'll be ready to go."
Brady helped the Patriots win the American Football Conference championship game. They beat the Pittsburgh Steelers 36 to 17.
Patriots Are Favorites
In Las Vegas, Nevada, many people try to guess who will win sports games. These people are called oddsmakers. The oddsmakers think the Patriots will win the Super Bowl.
New England played four games without Brady. The National Football League says that two years ago, Brady cheated. The Patriots used footballs that had not been fully blown up. Footballs with less air are sometimes easier to throw and catch. The NFL suspended Brady.
Brady played well against the Steelers. But it was New England's defense that stood out.
In the second quarter, the Steelers were one foot away from a touchdown. They could only get a field goal instead. The Patriots had forced two turnovers, too.
      
      