Earlier this month, Khairuldeen Makhzoomi found himself at a gathering with United Nations (U.N.) leader Ban Ki-moon. The U.N. was holding the dinner-and-lecture event in Los Angeles, California. Makhzoomi had been invited by a friend who studies global affairs, and he was thrilled to be there.
The University of California, Berkeley student studies political science and the Middle East. At the close of Ban Ki-moon's speech, Makhzoomi stood up to ask the leader about Iraqi Popular Mobilization units. These are volunteer armies fighting against the Islamic State, an extremist group in the Middle East.
The question was greeted by applause from around the room, followed by a lengthy response from the U.N. chief. It was the kind of exchange that Makhzoomi lives for. Having fled the dangerous climate in Iraq six years ago, he now focuses his research on finding ways to improve life in his home country.
But the next day, April 6, the young man's fortunes took an unfortunate turn.
An Ordinary Phone Conversation
Makhzoomi had just settled into his seat on a Southwest Airlines flight when he pulled out his cellphone to call his uncle in Baghdad, Iraq. His uncle is a political analyst, so Makhzoomi wanted to discuss last night's event with him.
He was speaking into the phone in Arabic, a language widely used in the Middle East. When he looked up, he noticed that the woman in the seat in front of him was turned in his direction, staring at him.
Feeling uncomfortable, Makhzoomi cut his conversation short, telling his uncle that he would call him back when he landed.
After Makhzoomi hung up, he noticed that the woman had left her seat and was making her way up the aisle to the front of the plane.
He became even more uneasy, afraid that she was going to report him.
"Why Would You Speak In Arabic?"
Makhzoomi is now convinced that is precisely what happened. Shortly after the woman's departure, a Southwest employee approached Makhzoomi and said, "Sir, you need to step out of the plane right now."
Makhzoomi was then led off the plane to a hallway by the boarding gate, where three police officers were awaiting him. He said the Southwest employee appeared to be of Middle Eastern descent, and began speaking to him in Arabic. The employee told him he used to live in Dubai, a city in the Middle East, and asked him where he was from. At Makhzoomi's urging, the employee switched back to English.
"Why would you speak in Arabic on the airplane?" the employee asked him. "It's dangerous. You know the environment around the airport. You understand what's going on in this country."
"I'm sorry," Makhzoomi responded. "I shouldn't have done that." But the employee continued to be accusatory, and Makhzoomi said he grew frustrated. Exasperated, the college student said, "This is what Islamophobia has done." Islamophobia is prejudice against Muslims, many of whom are from the Middle East and speak Arabic.
Three FBI Agents Join In
With the plane long gone, Makhzoomi was joined by more police officers and eventually three FBI agents. At one point, a police officer pressed Makhzoomi's head against a wall and held his hands behind his back. When the authorities asked him whether he had any weapons on him, Makhzoomi said he felt tears well up. "I don't have a knife," he repeated.
The FBI agents took him into a separate room and began questioning him. They asked him about his Muslim faith and his Middle Eastern background.
He said the agents were interested in his family's ties to Iraq. His mother, brother and he fled the country for Jordan in 2002, a year after his father was executed by the Iraqi government. The family now lives in Berkeley, California.
After further questioning, the FBI agent let him go, but told him he could not fly with Southwest. Makhzoomi was forced to book a flight with another airline, arriving back in Berkeley nine hours later than he had originally intended.
Southwest denied any wrongdoing. The airlines said in a statement that it "neither condones nor tolerates discrimination of any kind."
Fears And Bias Escalate
Stories of Muslims being removed from commercial flights have become more common. They have increased alongside escalated fears of Islamic State violence.
In the same week as Makhzoomi's incident, a woman wearing a Muslim headscarf was ordered off a Southwest flight bound for Seattle. In late March, an Arab-American family was removed from a United Airlines flight due to safety concerns. The family believes they suffered discrimination because the mother wears a headscarf.
"We are tired of Muslim-looking passengers being removed from flights" for no reason, said Ahmed Rehab. He is the leader of a major American Muslim association. 
Makhzoomi said he does not plan to take legal action. However, he said he wishes Southwest would publicly acknowledge their error.
"I came here to the U.S. because I believed in the values of this country," he said. "Islamophobia does not serve to fight terror. It plays right into the Islamic State game of striking fear among us."
      
      