Even students who do not pay attention in history class know the story. In 1922, British archaeologist Howard Carter discovered the tomb where King Tut was buried. It was one of the all-time great archaeological discoveries. Archaeology is the study of people of the ancient past through their objects.  
Now archaeologists may have found something just as important as King Tut's tomb. King Tut is also known as Tutankhamun, or the boy king.
They believe that King Tut's resting place in Luxor, in Egypt, is very likely to have two hidden rooms behind it. Why is that so exciting? One of the secret rooms could contain the remains of Queen Nefertiti. She is one of the wives of Tutankhamun’s father. There is a famous 3,300-year-old statue of Nefertiti's beautiful face.
Paintings May Tell Story Of Hidden Rooms
Egyptologists study ancient Egypt. Some Egyptologists think that the room beyond King Tut’s tomb is where Nefertiti is. The secret room may be behind walls that are covered with paintings. Some experts think the paintings tell of the other tomb.
Experts used a machine to do radar scans of the wall. It told them that there might be a room on the other side of the wall.
Others are not so sure. They doubt that the paintings say that there is a big room behind King Tut's tomb.
The person in charge of Egypt's ancient objects thinks the secret rooms are there. He thinks the rooms could be tombs. They could contain the tomb of Nefertiti. Or they could contain the tomb of King Tut's mother or his half-sister. 
He said that finding the rooms could be as important as the discovery of King Tut. It could be very important for Egyptian history.
More Research Needed Before Breaking Through Walls
The next step would be to find the size of the hidden rooms. To do this they must find out the thickness of the tomb's walls. Only then could they try to unseal any new rooms.
Finding a secret tomb would mean that more people would want to visit Egypt. Not as many people visit Egypt right now. People think it may not be safe. A discovery could also get more people to study ancient Egypt. 
Some Egyptologists think that if a tomb is there, it should be left alone. Others worry that the tomb could be robbed. They think that the objects in the tomb should be taken out safely.
Famous Boy King Only Ruled 9 Years
Tutankhamun died at 19 in 1324 B.C. He spent just nine years as a king. The place he was buried was discovered by Carter in November 1922. He found more than 5,000 objects. Jewelry and gold statues were inside. These objects have been shown in museums around the world. 
Nefertiti was the wife of a pharaoh named Akhenaten. Some Egyptologists think Nefertiti may have been a ruler after him. King Tut was Akhenaten’s son. Nefertiti was his stepmother.
Now Egyptologists are looking for more secret rooms in other tombs.
      
      