WASHINGTON, D.C. — School lunch rules could change after President-elect Donald Trump takes office. Some students complain now about the healthier school meals started by First Lady Michelle Obama. They may have reason to hope for a change. The billionaire businessman likes fast food such as hamburgers and fried chicken. He has promised to change tough national food laws.
President Barack Obama's administration has made healthier, safer and better-labeled food important over the last eight years. Sometimes his food policy is opposed by Republican politicians, farmers and people who work in the food industry. A policy is an officially accepted set of rules or ideas. The first lady worries that some American children are overweight in a way that is unhealthy. She started a program called "Let's Move" to help kids exercise more.
In addition to insisting on healthier school meals, the administration made many other changes in food laws. For example, a broad food safety law was pushed through Congress along with several new food labeling rules. Food makers must phase out trans fat. That is a type of unhealthy fat found especially in some vegetable oils. Calorie labels were added to menus and new limits on salt were placed on packaged foods.
Some Schools Dislike Healthy-Food Rules
The White House has also fought efforts by the Republican Congress to trim the country's Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP). The program helps people in the United States with low or no income buy food.
Sam Kass is a former White House senior adviser on nutrition and chef for the Obamas. He says, "Food advocates are already nostalgic for the Obama era and will be playing defense for the next four years."
Trump himself has not made a statement about school meal regulations. However, Republicans, people in charge of school nutrition and others in the food industry have fought against some of the Obama administration's rules. The rules set stricter fat, sugar and sodium limits on food served in schools and elsewhere. Many students have now adjusted to the healthier foods, but some schools still complain that they cost a lot of money. The schools also say that it is difficult to meet the standards.
Republican Lawmaker Predicts Big Shift
Robert Aderholt is a Republican lawmaker from Alabama who works on Agriculture Department spending. "I would be very surprised," he says, "if we don't see some major changes on the school lunch program."
Aderholt also sits on Trump's agriculture advisory committee. He says the Obama administration's approach was driven by activists. It was influenced by people who use strong actions like public protests to help make changes in politics or society. Aderholt says people who voted for Trump are looking for a more common-sense approach.
Many people have been suggested as candidates for the job of agriculture secretary. One of those people is Sid Miller. He is the Texas agriculture commissioner who overturned a state ban on deep fryers and soda machines in schools.
Deaths Led To New Safety Laws In 2010
In September, the Trump campaign made a proposal on its website. It suggested cutting down on food safety laws. It argued that the rules are burdensome to farmers. It also said that increased inspections of food manufacturing plants is "overkill." The campaign also referred to the "food police" at the Food and Drug Administration, a U.S. agency that makes sure that food, tobacco and medicine are safe. The Trump campaign later deleted the proposal from its website.
Congress passed new food safety regulations in 2010. It was one year after a salmonella outbreak linked to a Georgia peanut company killed nine people. Salmonella is a kind of bacteria that is sometimes in food and that makes people sick. Michael Taylor used to work for the FDA and oversaw the food safety rules. He says it would not be popular with consumers to change the rules back. "Consumers are only getting more focused on safety, health and wellness," Taylor says.
Trump says himself that he has an extreme fear of germs. He prefers eating at fast-food restaurants because he believes they have higher food safety standards.
Food Program For Poor Could Change
Republican lawmakers in Congress have already been thinking about changing SNAP. The program's cost grew to almost $80 billion per year after the recession in the late 2000s, a time when many people did not have jobs. Democrats in the Senate have consistently objected to any changes to the program. 
Many other laws are either already in place or close to it. One such law is a revised "nutrition facts" panel on the back of food packages. It would include a new line pointing out added sugars. Other laws are labeling for vegetables and fruits that have been modified genetically and calorie labels on restaurant and supermarket menus.
Kass, the former White House nutrition adviser, predicts that most of the regulations will stay. However, he also believes there will be little additional progress.
Margo Wootan works to influence government decisions about nutrition. She says, "The public is more interested than ever in nutrition and will continue to press companies."
      
      