WASHINGTON, D.C. — President-elect Donald Trump could change school lunch rules when he takes office, health officials are speculating. Students who complain about the healthier school meals initiated by first lady Michelle Obama may have reason to hope for that change. The billionaire businessman likes hamburgers and fried chicken, and is a proud customer of Kentucky Fried Chicken and McDonald's. In addition, he has promised to cut back on tough federal food regulations.
President Barack Obama's administration has made healthier, safer and better-labeled food a priority during the last eight years. Sometimes his food policy is opposed by Republican politicians, farmers and people who work in the food industry. The first lady also made reducing childhood obesity one of her signature issues through her "Let's Move" campaign.
In addition to insisting on healthier school meal rules, the administration made many other changes in food policy. For example, a sweeping food safety law was pushed through Congress along with several new food labeling regulations. It also started to phase out trans fat, a type of unhealthy fat found especially in some vegetable oils. Under the administration, calorie labels were added to menus, and new limits on sodium were placed on packaged foods.
Republicans Have Fought Food Rules
The White House has also fended off efforts in the Republican Congress to trim the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP). The program provides food-purchasing assistance for people in the United States with low or no income.
Sam Kass is a former White House senior adviser on nutrition and a personal chef for the Obamas. He says, "Food advocates are already nostalgic for the Obama era and will be playing defense for the next four years."
Trump himself has not made a statement about school meal regulations. However, Republicans, school nutrition directors and others in the food industry have resisted parts of the Obama administration's rules, which set stricter fat, sugar and sodium limits on food served in schools and elsewhere. Many students have now adjusted to the healthier foods, but some schools complain that complying with the new rules is costly. The schools also say the standards are difficult to meet.
Lawmaker Sees "Major Changes" Ahead
Representative Robert Aderholt of Alabama is the Republican chairman of the House subcommittee that oversees Agriculture Department spending. He says, "I would be very surprised if we don't see some major changes on the school lunch program."
Aderholt also sits on Trump's agriculture advisory committee. He says the Obama administration's approach was activist-driven, influenced by people who use strong actions like public protests to help make changes in politics or society. Aderholt says people who voted for Trump are looking for a more common-sense approach.
One of many names that have been suggested as candidates for the job of agriculture secretary is Sid Miller. He is the Texas agriculture commissioner who repealed a state ban on deep fryers and soda machines in schools. Miller recently got into trouble when he used a profanity on Twitter to describe Democrat Hillary Clinton.
On its website in September, the Trump campaign suggested cutting down on food safety regulations. It argued that the rules are burdensome to farmers and said that increased inspections of food manufacturing facilities is "overkill." The campaign also referred to the "food police" at the Food and Drug Administration, a U.S. agency that makes sure that food, tobacco and medicine are safe. The Trump campaign later deleted the proposal from its website.
Trump Praises Fast-Food Standards
Congress passed new food safety regulations in 2010. It was one year after a salmonella outbreak linked to a Georgia peanut company killed nine people. Michael Taylor, former FDA deputy commissioner for foods who oversaw the food safety rules, says it would not be popular with consumers to change the rules back. "Consumers are only getting more focused on safety, health and wellness," Taylor says.
Trump himself is a self-professed germaphobe, a person with an extreme fear of germs. He prefers eating at fast-food restaurants because he believes they have higher food safety standards.
Congressional Republicans have been looking closely at SNAP. The program's cost grew to almost $80 billion annually after the recession in the late 2000s. It was a period of time in which there was a decrease in spending activity and many people did not have jobs. Conservatives have suggested tightening eligibility standards or increasing work requirements. Democrats in the Senate have consistently objected to any changes to the program. 
Will Public Pressure Continue?
Many other laws are either already in place or close to it. One such law is a revised "nutrition facts" panel on the back of food packages. It would include a new line pointing out added sugars, a labeling law for genetically modified foods, and calorie labels on restaurant and supermarket menus.
Kass, the former White House nutrition adviser, predicts that most of the regulations will stay but that there will be little additional progress. Ongoing administration efforts to reduce sodium in food and antibiotics in meat could come to an end.
Margo Wootan is a lobbyist on nutrition laws for the Center for Science in the Public Interest. A lobby is an organized group of people who work together to influence government decisions that relate to a particular industry or issue. She says advocates will continue to be aggressive at the state and local levels and hopefully change will bubble up from that. "The public is more interested than ever in nutrition and will continue to press companies," Wootan says.
      
      