A wave from space has been tracked to where it came from, astronomers said. They are scientists who study stars and planets.
It is the first time scientists have been able to track this kind of wave. The waves are called fast radio bursts (FRBs). Fast radio bursts were discovered only 10 years ago. 
FRBs were seen last year by a telescope in New Mexico. A telescope is a tool to let people search in space.
The FRBs seemed to come from a small galaxy far from Earth, the scientists said. A galaxy is a large group of stars. 
FRBs flash only for a moment. They can give off huge power in a short burst. They quickly give off what the sun does in many years.
What Causes FRBs?
Scientists wonder what causes these powerful bursts.
Finding where they came from does not explain them. It does change several ideas about them, scientists said.
There have been 18 FRBs noted since 2007. Only one, named FRB 121102, repeated several times. It was seen in 2012.
This made a team of scientists get ready. They wanted to prepare in case it happened again. They asked to use a group of telescopes in New Mexico. The telescopes are very strong.
The idea paid off. In many hours of watching, the telescopes noticed nine bursts.
The Bursts Come From Very Far Away
Scientists know that the bursts come from a galaxy far away, one of the scientists said. Knowing this does not explain what causes them.
Many scientists have thought FRBs are caused by big events. The events could be stars exploding. It could be stars caving in.
It is possible that these events make the bursts. Still, these events happen one at a time. They do not fit with repeating bursts like those of FRB 121102.
The new discovery works against another idea, said Shriharsh Tendulkar. He is a scientist.
Not From Inside Our Galaxy
The idea came before scientists knew how far away any FRBs were, he said. Some people thought they could be coming from inside our galaxy, he said. Our galaxy is the Milky Way galaxy.
Now we know they can be far away. They might be from a smaller galaxy.
It is "not something in our backyard," said Casey Law. He is an astronomer.
Scientists are still looking at where the FRBs could come from.
They could come from a small star called a neutron star. This star is formed when another star explodes.
      
      