NEW YORK, N.Y. — Harper Lee was a famous writer. Lee wrote "To Kill a Mockingbird." Her book is about blacks being treated unfairly in a small town in the 1930s. Millions of young people have read and loved the book. Lee died on Thursday. She was 89 years old.
Michael Morrison is one of the leaders at the book company, HarperCollins U.S. The company printed Lee's books. He said the world knows Lee was a great writer. People do not know she was also full of joy and kindness. Lee lived her life the way she wanted to, he said. She lived surrounded by books and people who loved her.
Book's Story About Race
"To Kill a Mockingbird" came out in 1960. It tells the story of a girl nicknamed Scout. She grew up in the 1930s in the Southern part of the United States. The South had a lot of racial problems between blacks and whites. In the book, people said a black man attacked a white woman. It was not true. Scout's father, Atticus Finch, was a lawyer. Finch defended the man in court. That made white people angry.
"Mockingbird" quickly became a best-seller. It won the Pulitzer Prize, a famous book award. It was made into a movie in 1962. All over the country, high school students read Lee's book. 
By 2015, people around the world had bought more than 40 million copies, HarperCollins said.
Lee's Love Of Reading
Lee's only other book was "Go Set a Watchman." It came out in in 2015. Lee wrote it before "Mockingbird." Lee used many of the same characters. Many people did not like the book. In "Watchman," Atticus said that blacks did not have to be treated equally.
Lee's friends called her warm, lively and funny. She enjoyed life and played golf. She went to plays and concerts. Lee became a big reader when she was a child. She remained a book reader all her life.
A Mockingbird And Its Music
Nelle Harper Lee was born in Monroeville, Alabama. Her name was pronounced Nell. Like Atticus Finch, her father was a lawyer and lawmaker.
Lee went to New York to become a writer.
Her book's first title was "Atticus." It later became "To Kill a Mockingbird." The book was named after an old saying. It is all right to kill a blue jay but a bad sin to kill a mockingbird. The bird gives the world its music. Lee hopes that her book gives a good example on how people should treat each other.
      
      