Historians don't know when baseball teams began using phones in their dugouts and bullpens. The earliest mention of one, though, was in 1930. An article in the Sheboygan Press wrote about a phone in Yankee Stadium in New York.
Managers use the phones to call the bullpen. They tell pitchers to get ready to enter the game. The bullpen is where pitchers warm up. In the 1930s, telephones were the latest technology. Today, they aren't so much.
Some Teams Refuse To Change
T-Mobile is a major cellphone company. In 2013, it spent millions of dollars to replace Major League Baseball (MLB) stadiums' landlines with cellphones. Now, bullpen coaches could stand next to a pitcher and watch him throw. Before cellphones, coaches had to stand in the corner where the phone was connected.
But the idea did not catch on.
All 30 Major League ballclubs still use landlines, said Matthew Gould. He is an MLB spokesman. Managers did not want switch over to cellphones
That's how a lot of sports technology works, baseball experts say. The benefits may be obvious. Yet, many coaches and players are slow to use it.
"People are fearful that if I try something and it looks stupid, it could mean my career," said Nick Watanabe. He teaches about sports at the University of Mississippi. Watanabe said the ones who use technology have a big advantage.
NFL Uses Tablets On The Field
National Football League players and coaches used to look at dozens of photographs of the other team's plays. Staff members carried around thick folders of papers. They ran to and from printers getting the latest images.
Then in 2014, Microsoft gave the football teams Surface Pro tablets. Some teams did not use the devices right away. Others used both the tablets and folders. They called the tablets "iPads" or "knock-off iPads," which really annoyed Microsoft officials. The tech company sent employees to coach the coaches on how to use and talk about the devices.
Now this year, the NFL is allowing teams to use the Surface Pros on the field. The teams are using the tablets all the time, said Galen Clavio. He is the director of the National Sports Journalism Center and a professor of sports at Indiana University.
The average NFL coach lasts three years on the job, according to the magazine Sports Illustrated. If you spend time and money on an app that does not help win games, you can lose your job, Clavio said.
Devices Used To Watch Video Of Plays
That's the difference between technology that makes it into the sports world and technology that does not.
Cellphones don't help teams win games. Tablets that show video of a game, or iPads with scouting reports, do.
Professional sports coaches are likely to be of a different generation than the technology, said Ann Pegoraro. She is the director of the Institute for Sport Marketing at Laurentian University in Ontario, Canada. Imagine your grandfather yelling at the TV when a batter strikes out. Now imagine him tapping on an iPad to send his complaints to the players. It sounds crazy, right?
It is crazy, if your grandparent, like some coaches and team officials, does not know how to use it. If a younger person did, he or she might tell coaches to bench the player.
Tech Gear Now Part Of The Game
The sports-tech world is entering a new phase, Watanabe said. Not everybody trusts it, but those who do and can use technology are starting to see the benefits.
This year, Major League Baseball gave each team an iPad to keep in the dugout. It is the first time a mobile device has been allowed on the field in the league's 113-year history. The teams use them to look at player reports and game videos. Teams can make notes in the middle of a game with the Apple Pencil.
Unlike the cellphones, every team is using them, the league spokesman said.
      
      