In the Aucilla River in Florida, archaeologists have found evidence of some of the earliest known humans in the Americas.

Thirty feet under the river, a team of scuba-diving researchers have uncovered six stone artifacts -- including knives and flaked pieces of rock. The site is known as Page-Ladson and is located about 40 miles southeast of Tallahassee. 
Archaeologists also pulled up a mastodon tusk with cut marks on it. Experts say the marks were made when these ancient people cut up the animal next to a lake.
Rewriting The Story Of People In The Americas
The artifacts are the first proof that hunter-gatherers were living in the southeast United States about 14,550 years ago. Previously, scientists thought that humans did not arrive in the area until 1,500 years later. The discovery suggests a new story line for when and how people first came to the Americas.

"We are getting enough data now, particularly on the East Coast, to know that people have been around here for a very long time," said Dennis Stanford. He is an anthropologist at the Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History, and studies ancient humans.
From the 1930s through the early 2000s, most archaeologists thought that the first Americans belonged to the Clovis culture. These people left their spearheads scattered across a region that now covers the United States, Mexico and northern South America.
Most researchers believed this group were the descendants of hunters who followed their prey across the Bering land bridge from Siberia into Alaska around 13,000 or 14,000 years ago. From there, they migrated down into Canada. Very quickly they spread to the south.
The Clovis People Were Not The First
Over the past few decades, scientists have found evidence that the Clovis people were not first. In 1997, for instance, researchers found an archaeological site in Chile with evidence of human activity dating back to 14,500 years ago. In 2002, 14,300-year-old fossils of human feces were found in Oregon. A handful of other pre-Clovis sites popped up too, including one in Wisconsin and another in Texas.
The 14,500-year-old mastodon at Page-Ladson is now among the two or three oldest archaeological sites in the New World. In the American southeast, it is the oldest.
"It's important because it adds another site to the very small list of well-dated pre-Clovis sites," Jenkins said. "We don't find much evidence of these people because there weren't very many of them. We're looking for a very, very few people in a huge, huge haystack."
Complicating The Ice Age Theory
The finding also adds a new complication to another common theory. That theory claims that human hunters caused the rapid extinction of late Ice Age mammals like mastodons, mammoths and giant ground sloths. They all disappeared around 12,500 years ago.
Daniel Fisher is a paleontologist at the University of Michigan and studies ancient fossils. He worked on the current study. Fisher said the evidence shows that it actually took 2,000 years of living alongside humans before giant animals like mastodons became extinct. 
Fisher thinks that the ancient people made the cut marks on the mastodon tusk as they ripped the tusk from its base, perhaps to gain access to edible tissue inside. "A tusk this size would have held over 15 pounds of tender, nutritious tissue in its pulp cavity and that certainly would have been of great value," he said.
The excavations at Page-Ladson are not new. In the 1980s and '90s, another research team determined that the site was more than 14,000 years old. Their findings were disregarded by the archaeology community.
"It was just impossible for them to accept at that time that there was anything older than Clovis," said Jessi Halligan, one of the people in charge of the new work.
Michael Waters and Jessi Halligan were in charge of digs at Page-Ladsen from 2012 to 2014. Waters is the director of the Center for the Study of the First Americans at Texas AandM University. Halligan is a geoarchaeologist at Florida State University, and specializes in underwater archaeology.
Gathering The Necessary Proof
The field work was challenging. The Aucilla River is cold, and the water is so dark and murky that divers can't see without using lights mounted on their helmets.
Over three years, the team uncovered six artifacts 15 feet below the riverbed.
Not everyone agrees with the study's conclusions, however. Don Grayson, an anthropologist at the University of Washington, said another team thinks that the artifacts are much younger.
Waters, however, said his group's work shows that the artifacts were made by a people who came before Clovis.
You need three things to prove the age of the site, he said. First, you need clear evidence of human activity, usually in the form of stone tools. Second, these tools must be found in a solid place. Third, these artifacts must be dated using a reliable dating method, he said. "At Page-Ladson, we meet all three."
Now the researchers hope to turn to other questions.
"I want to see if we can find other sites with more information and features to give us a more complete picture of how these people were living," Halligan said.
      
      