CAMP PENDLETON, Calif. — Reckless was not only a horse. She was also a Marine. This hero horse fought alongside the U.S. Marines in the Korean War. Recently, she was honored with a statue at Camp Pendleton, a Marine Corps base camp.
The horse known as Staff Sergeant Reckless became famous during the Korean War, but her story has since faded from public memory.
A Los Angeles-area screenwriter is trying to bring back Reckless's story. Robin Hutton wrote the 2014 book "Sgt. Reckless, America's War Horse." She also led a three-year effort to set up the statue at Camp Pendleton. Reckless lived out her last years at the camp.
“I thought, this is the greatest horse story I had never heard about,” says Hutton, who is also trying to make the story into a movie.
Horse Purchased For $250
Hutton sees Reckless as a way to teach the history of the Korean conflict, often called the "forgotten war." The war, which was fought from 1950-1953, began when North Korea invaded South Korea. The U.S. came to South Korea's aid. The soldiers who fought in this conflict are fewer and fewer in number.
In October, a few dozen Marines who fought in Korea gathered at Camp Pendleton to honor the horse. 
Reckless' story begins with a young officer named Eric Pedersen. In 1952, he was told to buy an animal to carry heavy ammunition. He purchased a small mare, a female horse, for $250. 
The horse, named Reckless, proved her worth beyond price. Her main job was carrying missiles, which would be shot from a huge rifle. Each weighed more than 20 pounds. The Marines tied four to six rounds to her back.
Received Purple Heart Award
In March 1953, the enemy attacked the company's camp, and a battle broke out. During the fighting, Reckless made 51 trips to resupply the guns. She carried more than 9,000 pounds in total and trekked over 35 miles up and down steep hills. She also carried wounded Marines back from the battlefield. 
“I looked back at the eastern skyline through all the smoke and could hardly believe my eyes,” says Harold Wadley, a soldier who served with the horse. He said he watched as the horse came over the edge of the hill alone, carrying a heavy pack and struggling to stay on her feet. 
Reckless was wounded twice and received the Purple Heart, an award for wounded soldiers.
Wadley says he sees more than a horse when he looks at the new statue.
“To me, she represents a whole lot more than herself," he says. He adds that she represents his fellow Marines and the many men who lost their lives in the war.
"She Was Another Marine"
Michael Mason, an officer during Korea, remembers lighter moments, too.
At 6 a.m. each day, Reckless would stick her nose in his tent. His bunkmate was one of the unit’s cooks. The horse yanked at the blanket on the cook’s bed until he got up and fed her.
“We treated her as though she was another Marine. She was one of us,” Mason says. 
That kind of horse deserves a statue, or even two. The first statue, made by artist Jocelyn Russell, was set up in 2013 at the Marine Corps Museum in Quantico, Virginia.
The Camp Pendleton statue, by the same artist, stands about 12 feet high. The cost was $185,000. Most of the total was raised through donations.
Reckless Died In 1968
Reckless’ story almost did not have a happy ending, according to Hutton.
The horse stayed behind in Korea after the fighting ended. Finally, an article in the Saturday Evening Post created enough attention to bring her to the United States. She lived in the stables at Camp Pendleton. Her life there was full of carrots and parades. She eventually gave birth to three colts. 
Reckless died in May 1968. She was buried at the base stables with full military honors. The story of her life made the front page of the San Diego Union newspaper.
Her memorial reads, “Reckless. Pride of the Marines.”
      
      