As he slices through 2 inches of skin and blubber, Rob Deaville considers the possible causes of death of the sea mammal on his dissecting table. “It’s a female, juvenile, stranded in north Devon,” he says. “It looks healthy. It may have just come too close to shore.” 
This porpoise is in the process of being dismembered. Small parts of its vital organs will be tested for disease and pollutants. It's one of hundreds that come to the labs in the Zoological Society of London (ZSL) each year, awaiting a post-mortem – a necropsy, in the scientific term – that will help to establish how the animal lived and why it died.
In recent weeks the team’s expertise has been called on to investigate a highly unusual series of events. A mass stranding of sperm whales has puzzled scientists, with a total count of six now having washed up on British beaches. This is the biggest stranding in the century since ZSL has been making a count and taking custody of the bodies.
Strandings Are Probably Related
This is part of a much bigger event. At least 29 have now been found on the coasts of the United Kingdom, the Netherlands and Germany. It is impossible to tell whether all the whales were members of the same pod or a clutch of pods, but it seems likely that the strandings are related. Sperm whales tend to live in groups of females with their young, while adult males roam farther on their own.
Deaville is the project manager of the Cetacean Strandings Investigation program, which is kind of a CSI for whales, dolphins and their relatives. Deaville is reluctant to make guesses about the cause of the deaths. While people naturally want to have answers as soon as possible, the need for close examination and the caution needed in the scientific method mean this is not realistic. “We just do not know yet, and I don’t want to speculate,” he says.
Disease, Chemicals, Overfishing
Several potential explanations have been put forward. Disease may be a factor or changes related to climate change or the overfishing of some of the sea areas where the whales tend to gather. Most recently, concerns have been raised over the lingering effects of now-banned chemicals, called PCBs, polluting European waters.
PCBs are lipophilic, notes Deaville, meaning that they are found in concentration in the animals’ thick layer of blubber. That is why extensive samples of it are taken in the labs. The liver is also a key source of samples as it will reveal the levels of heavy metals, like lead, cadmium and mercury, that the creature has absorbed, mostly from its fish diet.
These are the early warning systems of the seas. Heavy metals are now so concentrated in fish that women who are expecting a baby and small children are advised to eat no more than two portions of affected fish in a week.
Did They Just Lose Their Way?
Another likely cause of death is that the whales got lost. The North Sea is one of the shallowest in the world. Archaeologists are only now discovering the remains of human settlements buried on the seabed from the last Ice Age, when that area known as “Doggerland” was above sea level and inhabited.
For whales, which navigate by echolocation in a similar way to bats, shallow water is a trap. It prevents them from using sound. When out of the breeding grounds of their usual prey, like squid, they can quickly become starved and dehydrated. Once in shallow water, the enormous weight of their bodies is no longer so buoyant and can crush them. The recently found dead whales may simply have strayed too far from their usual haunts and been unable to find a way out. It is still unclear whether climate change has played a role. Climate change has caused cold water species to move north and brought normally tropical fish to U.K. waters.
May Be Sign Of Large Population
While it is hard to count marine populations accurately, strandings may be a good sign, says Deaville. “The bigger the population, the more likely it is that some will be stranded,” he explains.
The whales, and any more that are found, will be extensively examined in the ZSL labs. Any results and conclusions that can be drawn from them are likely to become available in the next few months. However, even those findings may still leave the mystery unsolved. “We don’t know whether we will find an answer,” says Deaville.
Cetacean Strandings Investigation Program In Brief
The CSIP has a curious history. Under a 13th-century law enacted by Edward II, all whales, sturgeon and porpoises are regarded as “royal fish.” When caught by U.K. fishermen or stranded around the coast, they are the property of the crown. The queen no longer exercises her right to have this bounty hauled onto her dinner table or cut up to make corsets, but the CSIP fills in, building on work done at the Natural History Museum since 1913 when formal records of strandings began.
The necropsies and the strandings investigations will help inform conservation efforts. They also act as an early warning system in case of emerging diseases or other hazards for marine mammals.
Based at the ZSL, next to the London zoo, the CSIP recently celebrated its 25th birthday. In 25 years, Deaville has examined more than 3,500 specimens. This research adds to our knowledge of the wildlife that dominate the U.K.’s seas.
      
      