Nature has begun to fight back against the vast piles of filth dumped into its soils, rivers and oceans. It has evolved a plastic-eating bacteria — the first known to science.
A team of Japanese researchers has discovered a bacteria that can break the molecular bonds of one of the world’s most-used plastics: polyethylene terephthalate, also known as PET or polyester.
The Japanese research team sifted through hundreds of samples of PET pollution before making their discovery. They eventually came upon a colony of bacteria using the plastic as a food source.
Additional tests found that the bacteria almost completely broken down low-quality plastic within six weeks. This was extremely fast when compared with other biological agents recently found to have an appetite for PET, including a related bacteria, leaf compost and a fungus enzyme.
Bacteria Are Very Adaptable
Tracy Mincer, a researcher at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, said the new study was very carefully done. It is the first study to show plastic being completely hydrolyzed — broken down — by bacteria, he said.
The molecules that form PET are bonded very strongly, said professor Uwe Bornscheuer. “Until recently, no organisms were known to be able to decompose it.”
The newly discovered bacteria has been named Ideonella sakaiensis 201-F6. The research team suspects it may have evolved enzymes specifically capable of breaking down PET in response to the accumulation of the plastic in the environment in the past 70 years.
Such rapid change in a bacteria's structure is possible, said Enzo Palombo, a professor of microbiology. Bacteria have an extraordinary ability to adapt to their surroundings, he said. “If you put a bacteria in a situation where they’ve only got one food source to consume, over time they will adapt to do that.”
“I think we are seeing how nature can surprise us” and how quick to recover it can be, Mincer added.
Plastics = Potential Pollution
The bacteria took longer to eat away highly crystallized PET, which is used in plastic bottles. Unfortunately, that means the enzymes and processes would need refinement before they could be useful for industrial recycling or pollution clean-up.
“It’s difficult to break down highly crystallized PET,” said professor Kenji Miyamoto, who took part in the new study. “Our research results are just the initiation for the application. We have to work on so many issues needed for various applications. It takes a long time,” he said.
One-third of all plastics end up as garbage polluting the environment. Millions of tons of plastic end up in the ocean every year, creating vast accumulations of life-choking rubbish.
PET makes up almost one-sixth of the world’s annual plastic production. Despite PET being one of the more commonly recycled plastics, the World Economic Forum (WEF) reports that only just over half is ever collected for recycling and far less actually ends up being reused.
Breaking Down Ocean Trash
Advances in biodegradable plastics that break down on their own and in recycling offer hope for the future, Bornscheuer said. However, such advances do not "help to get rid of the plastics already in the environment.”
Nonetheless, the potential applications of the newly discovered bacteria remain unclear. The most obvious use would be as a biological agent in nature, Palombo said. Theoretically, bacteria could be sprayed on the huge floating trash heaps building up in the oceans. A similar method, using a different bacteria, is already employed to combat oil spills.
Unfortunately, the newly discovered bacteria would not be useful in the ocean. It only consumes PET, which is too dense to float on water. However, Bornscheuer said, the discovery could open the door to the discovery or manufacture of biological agents able to break down other plastics.
Palombo said the discovery suggested that other bacteria may have already evolved to do this job and simply needed to be found.
“I would not be surprised if samples of ocean plastics contained microbes that are happily growing on this material and could be isolated in the same manner,” he said.
However, Mincer said, breaking down ocean trash comes with dangers of its own. Plastics often contain additives that can be toxic when released. Plastic debris may actually be less dangerous before it is broken down, he said.
Recycling Figures In
Beyond dealing with the plastic already fouling up the environment, the newly discovered bacteria could potentially be used for recycling.
Miyamoto’s team suggested that the environmentally harmless elements left behind by the bacteria after the PET was broken down could be the same ones from which the plastic is formed. If this were true, perhaps a process could be developed to isolate those elements, Bornscheuer said. Perhaps PET could be produced without the need for oil-based starting materials, which could provide huge savings, he added. According to the WEF, 6 percent of global oil production is devoted to the production of plastics.
However, the plastics industry said the need for a new biological process to replace or add to the current mechanical recycling process is very small.
“PET is 100 percent recyclable,” said Mike Neal, the chairman of the Committee of PET Manufacturers in Europe. Switching to using bacteria would not make much economic sense, he said.
      
      