BALTIMORE, Md. — Jamone Mckenzie rides along on his skateboard. He is 20 years old. He bends down and jumps. His skateboard flips in the air under him. With perfect timing, his feet touch the board as its wheels land.
Mckenzie is part of a growing group of black street skateboarders in Baltimore, Maryland. They skate every day around the city. In this group, many young men have found support and family.
The skaters are from different neighborhoods. Many of them are from poor parts of Baltimore. Some feel overlooked by the city. Others do not feel welcome in the mainstream skating world. But what connects the group is the love of the skateboard.
Saved From The Streets
Growing up, Mckenzie briefly lived in a homeless shelter. On his way back from school, he would pass a skate park. He was fascinated by the skateboarders. He decided that one day he would skate, too.
Later, Mckenzie started skating on his own. He went into the city to find other skaters.
“I never knew it was this big until I got down here,” he said. "There are hundreds of us."
Mckenzie's mother is amazed by her son's growth. In many ways, she is simply glad that he is alive. Over 340 people were killed in Baltimore in 2015. There is a lot of violence there. The year 2015 was one of the deadliest years in the city's history.
Yaamiyn Whitaker is also glad to be alive. The young man lifts his shirt. He points to a scar left by a bullet.
Whitaker is a thin young man. He has a brother who was recently sent to prison. Some of his friends have been murdered.
Skateboarding saved Whitaker from the streets. Today, he is a part of a skate crew called Milk Squad. He can often be seen skating around Baltimore harbor.
Many Kinds Of Skaters
Skateboarders in Baltimore can skate for free in two outdoor skate parks. One is in Carroll Park and the other is in Hampden. The Hampden park exists thanks to Stephanie Murdock. She is the president of the charity Skatepark of Baltimore. The park hopes to help young people skate for free every day.
"Activities are limited for young kids in Baltimore," said Murdock. She worked for 10 years to get the park built.
Some people are surprised by it, she said. Many do not believe there are black skateboarders.
But many different kinds of people skate. There have been black skaters since skateboarding began, said professor Gregory Snyder.
      
      