TALLAHASSEE, Fla. —  Travis Rudolph was known for playing college football. Now, he is also known for his kindness.
Rudolph plays football for Florida State University (FSU). One day he visited a school in Tallahassee, Florida. In the lunchroom, he saw Bo Paske eating alone. Rudolph grabbed some pizza and sat with Bo. 
Bo is in sixth grade and just started a new school. He also has autism. Making friends and talking to people can be hard with autism.
Football Player Has Lunch With A Boy Named Bo
Rudolph talked with Bo. "He started off telling me his name was Bo, telling me how much he loves Florida State. We went from there," Rudolph says. "He had a nice smile on his face."
Leah Paske is Bo's mother. She worries about him. When Paske saw a photo of Rudolph and Bo eating together it made her so happy that she cried. Then, Paske shared the picture on the Internet. The story became very popular. 
The next day many kids sat with Bo. "He was at a table full of girls, which I thought was funny," Paske says.
Mother Worries About Son With Autism
Paske worries about how other kids will treat Bo. Every day she asks him if he felt sad, and who he sat with at lunch. Sometimes he tells her that he ate with a classmate. Mostly he eats by himself.
Paske says autism protects Bo. It keeps him from feeling sad. She says, "He doesn't seem to notice when people stare at him when he flaps his hands. And he doesn't seem to mind if he eats lunch alone."
Everyone Was Proud
Mike Halligan took the photo of the two eating lunch. He works at Bo's school. Halligan texted the photo to Paske to make her feel better about how her son was doing in a new school.
Paske says the photo has helped in another way. It teaches people about autism.
Rudolph says, "I just wanted to go say hi to the kid, because I saw him eating alone. I didn't even know anybody took a photo of it." He says he is glad that the photo is helping.
Bo is excited that Rudolph signed his lunch box, and is also enjoying all of the people talking to him about it. "It's been awesome. Everyone was so proud of me," Bo says.
      
      