What value does the worldwide digital economy give Africa? The largest technology companies all have strategies for getting their products into African countries, but few have plans to provide what Africans truly need: jobs in the economy of the future.
Africa’s population is expected to soar from 1.2 billion today to 2.4 billion by 2050. Over the same period, the tech titans of the world will be using their stockpiles of cash to transform the global economy through innovations such as self-driving vehicles, genetic modification and even colonizing space.
And yet the prospects are bleak for Africans who want to play a role in shaping how these technologies influence their lives. Everywhere they look, the picture is the same. Free digital products have been useful, and in some cases – such as email, mapping and social media – they have transformed daily life. But they hardly ever translate into local ownership. Even as tech revenues soar, almost no tech jobs are being created for Africans. Indeed, Silicon Valley could soon face a backlash similar to the reaction to Hollywood’s failure to hire black actors, writers, directors and composers.
The African Market Is Enormous
Tech companies recognize the importance of Africa, which will soon have a quarter of the world’s young people. Asian companies like Samsung and Huawei are active in Africa. They are likely to pull ahead of their American competitors in the contest to introduce the much-talked-about Internet of Things. It means connecting all kinds of devices, from factory machinery to washing machines, to the Internet and to each other, allowing them to communicate. Microsoft and IBM have programs that target Africa, and General Electric has declared that it is seeking to turn itself into a “digital industrial giant” there. Twitter, Facebook and Google have gained the lion’s share of digital traffic in Africa at almost no cost.
Apple, however, has hardly made a mark there; out of all the tech products sold in Africa, less than 3 percent are made by Apple. Its iPhone is even being outsold by the Blackberry. The company has shown no sign that it intends to design any product that would be affordable in Africa.
Tech Companies Are Not Hiring Africans
When it comes to jobs, every tech company looks as disconnected as Apple. The African-American employees of Twitter, Facebook and Google could fit on a single Airbus A380 jet plane. African-born executives at these and other tech companies are even rarer – and those who have found jobs are often extremely disappointed. “It is soul-sucking to be a high-talent African at a Silicon Valley company,” one African tech leader said. “You leave because you get tired of fighting for attention and authority, and being reminded how lucky you are to work for them.”
In Africa, the employment opportunities are pitiful. Twitter has no operations in Africa, Google employs only about 100 people there and Facebook’s lone African office is staffed with fewer than 50 people – hardly enough to run an average supermarket.
The gap between the availability of technology products and the number of tech jobs in Africa is huge. Targeted projects – such as Facebook’s Internet.org – are designed to employ only experienced talent, almost all of them from abroad.
They Should Put Their Money Where Their Mouth Is
Tech companies fall over themselves to boast that they are creating jobs in Africa, announcing training programs and competitions for start-ups. Google promises to train 1 million Africans in digital skills. But what’s the value of tech training if there are no tech jobs?
Young African graduates in science, math and engineering are told they can get ahead by becoming entrepreneurs. But the continent lacks the capital, customer base and talent that give new start-ups at least a remote chance of success. Without good entry-level jobs to develop skills and pursue careers, African graduates are falling further behind.
Offering real jobs to build a local workforce is good business. It is the only path to a sustainable place in the African market, and it will also be the best source of Africa’s future business leaders.

Bruce Krogh is Director of Carnegie Mellon University’s Africa campus in Rwanda. Jonathan Ledgard is a former East Africa correspondent for The Economist and Director of Future Africa at the École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne.

      
      