In the news lately, there have been many stories about police and black Americans. There is a group called Black Lives Matter. They believe that black people in America are treated unfairly. They were driven to action by a few killings by police. Police shot and killed Michael Brown. He was 18 years old. They killed 9-year-old Tamir Rice.  Both Michael and Tamir did not have weapons. Police said they thought both did have weapons. They felt unsafe.
Many of the Black Lives Matter protests focus on black men and boys. One author named Monique W. Morris says black women and girls are also treated unfairly. She wrote a book called "Pushout: The Criminalization of Black Girls in Schools." She starts her book with a story about a girl. Her name is Dajerria Becton, and she is 14 years old. Last year, a policeman pushed Dajerria to the ground. He was caught on camera. After people saw the video, he lost his job.
Morris says many black girls are treated badly like this. Morris says that this is a big problem in schools. At school, children should feel protected. Instead, black girls feel like they are under attack.
More Likely To Be Punished
Morris studies how schools treat some students unfairly. For this book, she wrote about black girls. She spoke to young women.
She found that many schools do not understand black girls. The schools act like all black girls are all the same. Too many schools punish black girls before they do anything wrong.
Black girls are also more likely to be punished than black boys.
Morris thinks this is because some people have bad ideas about black women. They think black women act in a certain way. When black girls say or do something, their teachers might take it the wrong way. A girl might say something in class. She might think she is standing up for herself. Her teacher might think she is being disrespectful. Morris says these ideas cause teachers to treat black girls badly. The girls are pushed out of their schools.
Judging Girls' Behavior
To understand Morris's book, it is important to know that it can be hard to be a girl. It can also be hard being black. A black girl will have a harder time than a black boy or a white girl, she says.
Morris writes that many teachers do not understand the way black girls act. Teachers think the girls act a certain way because they do not like school. Morris says this is wrong. Some girls act a certain way because of other reasons. They might have a tough life outside of school.
      
      