BERLIN, Germany — Many German Jews are afraid to let so many Muslim refugees into the country. The refugees come from places that are against Israel. Israel is a Jewish country. 
Armin Langer was studying to become a rabbi. A rabbi is a Jewish religious leader. He was kicked out of his German school. He wrote a paper disagreeing with Joseph Schuster. He is a leader of German's Jewish community.
Schuster wants to stop so many Muslim refugees from moving to Germany. These refugees are trying to escape a war in Syria. 
Group Helps Jews Meet Muslims
Langer started a group called Salaam-Shalom. The group is for Muslims and Jews to get to know each other. He thinks German Jewish people should never be unkind to another group. They are all in the same boat. 
Langer's college did not like what he said. Langer thinks he should be allowed to say what he believes. 
Many German Jews were angry about what Langer wrote in his article. They fear the newcomers will be against Jewish people. 
Schuster agreed that the refugees just want to live in peace. But he thinks their way of life means they will be anti-Jewish.
Attacks Have Made People Nervous
Many German Jewish people are afraid of the Muslim refugees. Lately, there have been more attacks and protests about Jews and Israel. Israel is a Jewish nation. They have been fighting with Palestine for a long time. People in Palestine are mostly Muslims. They are fighting over land.
Muslim fighters in Europe have also killed many people. The attacks took place in France, Denmark and Belgium. 
Schuster said that he was not part of Langer's dismissal from school. But he said he understood why it happened. He feels Langer caused more disagreements among people.
Some Afraid To Show They Are Jewish
Shaked Spier is a German-Israeli. He helps newly arrived refugees. Spier pointed out that anti-Jewish feelings started long before the migrants arrived. His grandparents escaped from Nazi Germany in the 1930s. They got out before the Holocaust. The Holocaust was a terrible time in history. Millions of Jewish people were killed. 
Levi Salomon represents a Jewish group. He said the refugees should be made part of German life quickly. They should learn about the Holocaust. 
Some Jewish families are afraid of the Muslim refugees. One Israeli mother no longer lets her children speak Hebrew outside. She does not want people to know her children are Jewish. She is afraid they will be harmed. 
Langer said Jews and Muslims need to talk to each other. He thinks it is the only way they will get over their fears. He said Germany's Jews should be more worried about the attacks against the refugees.
      
      