There's a new app sweeping the nation. Lots of people are really into it. "Pokemon Go" is a new take on Pokemon, the iconic Japanese video game and animated series first made popular in the 1990s.
The game, made by Niantic and the Pokemon Company, was released on July 6. It allows players to capture Pokemon characters in real-world places. The app makes the little monsters appear on your smartphone screen as you walk through your neighborhood. It seems as if they are right in front of you. 
The game quickly shot to the top of the charts for Apple's free apps. It has gathered at least 100,000 downloads on Google's Play store. It also quickly led to a number of reported Pokemon-related accidents.
Don't Pokemon And Drive
Users are posting about their incidents online. One post on the popular social networking website Reddit said, "Pokemon Go put me in the ER last night." "Pokemon Go" has its own Reddit page. 
"Not even 30 minutes after the release last night, I slipped and fell down a ditch," said the Reddit user, who broke a bone in his foot. "I told all the doctors I was walking my dog lol... Watch where you're going, folks!"
Others posted that they also had near misses while chasing Pokemon. Some have reported problems while looking for Pokemon and driving.
It should go without saying: do not play "Pokemon Go" and drive.
Look Up And Look Around
A.T. Still University, a medical school in Arizona, even sent out an email to its students about the game. The school asked students to capture Pokemon carefully.
"Please approach them with caution and remember to look up from your phone" to make sure you don't run into anything, the email said.
The "Pokemon Go" app has a warning on the loading screen. The warning asks players to pay attention to their surroundings. But clearly some people are getting so excited they ignore it. 
The Pokemon Company partnered with Niantic to create the game. Niantic has some rules for its other game, "Ingress."
"Pay attention to your surroundings; you never know what beautiful or interesting things you'll see while playing the game," the company advises players. Niantic has also reminded "Ingress" players to respect real-world rules. For example, a point of interest may show up on someone's property, but it's important to avoid trespassing. It is a good reminder for "Pokemon Go" players.
Luring In New Friendships
Though there are some problems, the game has some surprising benefits, too. 
One Reddit user used a lure, an object that draws Pokemon to a particular spot. The user wrote that the lure also drew some nearby players.
"It ended up causing a random meet up!" the original poster said. "About 30 random people grouped up to catch pokemon (sic)!"
      
      