WASHINGTON, D.C. – President Donald Trump signed an executive action Wednesday to begin planning for a border wall with Mexico, which he believes will help to keep people from illegally crossing into the United States.
Trump said that construction on the project would begin in a few months. He also repeated his promise that American taxpayers would be reimbursed by the Mexican government for the costs of the multibillion-dollar wall.
When asked when construction would begin, Trump said, "As soon as we can physically do it. I would say in months … Certainly planning is starting immediately."
Executive Orders In Place
Trump visited the Department of Homeland Security, which secures the country from threats. He signed two executive orders on immigration that aim to ramp up immigration enforcement. They will add more detention centers, where immigrants are taken while officials decide whether to give them a visa to stay in the country or to send them back to the country they game from. The orders will also take away federal grant money for cities that do not follow federal immigration laws, aides said.
Executive actions are informal moves or proposals by the president, while executive orders are official documents that the president uses to manage the federal government.
Construction Costs Could Reach $20 Billion
The construction of a wall along the southern U.S. border was Trump's chief campaign promise. He blamed illegal immigration for taking jobs away from Americans. He also said illegal immigration is a national security concern.
"Building a barrier is more than just a campaign promise, it's common sense, the first step to really securing our porous border," White House press secretary Sean Spicer told reporters. "Federal agencies are going to unapologetically enforce the law – no ifs, ands or buts."
Trump has claimed from the beginning of his presidential campaign that Mexico will pay for the wall, but Mexican leaders have balked at that idea. Trump has said the project will start with U.S. tax dollars so construction can begin quickly.
Construction industry analysts have said the project could cost up to $20 billion. Trump is scheduled to welcome Mexican President Enrique Peña Nieto to the White House next week.
"We'll be reimbursed at a later date from whatever transaction we make from Mexico," Trump said. "I'm just telling you there will be a payment. It will be in a form, perhaps a complicated form."
"Chaos And Destruction Will Be The Outcome"
White House officials said Trump's appearance at the Department of Homeland Security is meant as the first step in a rollout of a series of executive actions to begin fulfilling his campaign promises on immigration. It also is likely to spark intense resistance from the immigrant rights community, which has accused the president of exaggerating to win support at the expense of immigrants and refugees.
"The hateful, xenophobic, anti-immigrant and anti-Muslim (talk) that was a hallmark of the Trump campaign is starting to become a reality," Marielena Hincapie, executive director of the National Immigration Law Center, said on conference call with reporters. "Chaos and destruction will be the outcome."
Spicer said the executive actions would include directives to the Department of Homeland Security to examine ways to limit federal funding to cities that do not report undocumented immigrants to federal authorities. He also said the Trump administration would resume the Secure Communities program that granted greater immigration enforcement powers to local authorities, which had been shut down by the Obama administration over concerns it had led to abuse.
Immigrant Program In Jeopardy
Spicer said Trump will not sign any orders overturning the Obama administration's Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) program just yet. The program has allowed more than 700,000 younger immigrants brought to the country illegally as children to apply for two-year work visas.
Trump has promised to overturn DACA, which has been an enormously popular program among the immigrant rights community.
"The president understands the magnitude of this problem," Spicer said of DACA. "He's a family man. He has a huge heart."
Trump will work through it "in a very humane way," Spicer added.
      
      