BONSALL, Calif. — When describing 14-year-old Cindy Buenrostro, her parents and coaches call her fierce, determined and ultra-competitive. They also call her a survivor. Nine years ago, her strength of will helped her escape an abusive situation, and today it’s driving her toward her Olympic dreams.
Buenrostro is a five-sport athlete who qualified this year for the USA Pentathlon program. The modern pentathlon celebrates all-around athletes with expertise in swimming, horseback riding, fencing, running and shooting. Her dream is to make the Junior Olympics in two years and compete at the 2020 Olympics in Japan.
Cindy gets up at 5:30 each morning to start her training day with a protein shake. Then she heads to the pool for the first of two hour-long daily swims, followed by an hour or so of riding her thoroughbred, Star, at her parents’ 3-acre ranch in San Luis Rey Valley. Cindy and her 8-year-old sister, Jaci, were in the county foster-care system when they came to live with their adoptive parents, Liz and Mauricio Buenrostro, seven years ago.
“My job as a mom is to teach Cindy to be a young lady, but I have to balance that with her warrior side,” said Liz, whose company manages homeowners associations. “I think God has a place for this girl, and she has the courage to face it.”
Cindy was just 5 years old when she showed up with a secret in the principal’s office at her elementary school. A friend of her birth mother was abusing her, and she bravely asked for help. Cindy, Jaci and an older sister were immediately removed from their home and placed in foster care, where they lived, separately, for the next two years.
“My experience changed me in many ways,” Cindy said, on reflection. “The way I was acting, afraid of what to do in my future, I was lost. But I’m much more courageous now. I stand taller, supported by a lot of people who have heard my story.”
Liz and Mauricio, a retired engineer, met in their early 40s in Long Beach. It was too late to have their own children when they married 11 years ago, so they decided to adopt and spent five years going through the process with the county. When they heard the girls’ story, Liz said it touched a deep chord in her.
“When I was a kid, I had a difficult dad, so I knew what not having peace at home is about. I have a lot of compassion for kids in difficult situations,” she said.
Although she has spent most of her career in the real estate industry, Liz said it was a three-month job in Albania in the late 1990s that changed her life. She worked for the International Medical Corps repatriating refugee women and children who had fled the conflict in Kosovo. After she returned to San Diego, she felt compelled to help those in need of rescue.
One of the first things the couple discovered when they brought the girls home in 2009 was that Jaci, then 2, had a learning disability. Knowing that horses were good for children on the autism spectrum, they sold their home in San Marcos and moved to the ranch in Bonsall, where they have slowly accumulated a menagerie of mostly rescued dogs, chickens, horses and a pony. Riding was healing for Jaci, but it was Cindy who connected most with the horses.
“She’s super-sensitive, and she gets both animals and people,” Liz said.
Through the Fallbrook Pony Club, Cindy became an accomplished equestrian. Two years ago, she also started swimming with the Fallbrook Associated Swim Team. Head coach Sean Redmond said he noticed something about Cindy right away.
“My first impression was that after every set or practice she would come to me and say ‘what can I do to improve?’ Right there it showed me her willingness to learn and see how far she could go,” he said.
Redmond, who also coaches girls swimming at Fallbrook High, said that when he heard last fall that Cindy was an equestrian, he suggested the family consider the modern pentathlon, one of his favorite Olympic sports.
“Whenever I meet kids who are good swimmers and equestrians, I recommend it because they’ve already accomplished the two hardest skills. Nobody has ever taken me up on my recommendation until Cindy came along,” he said.
Cindy got excited at the prospect of competing, and Mauricio, who once played for Mexico’s national volleyball team, helped her plan a training, diet and fitness regimen.
“I tell her discipline is important in athletics,” Mauricio said. “You have to work out, rest well, eat a good diet, train and set goals. You must do all this to be at the top level.”
Each morning, Mauricio whips up a homemade concoction of raw eggs, coconut oil, chia seeds and bananas for Cindy’s breakfast. Then they start their day together. He’s been teaching her the dual disciplines of running and shooting, where the competitor alternates cross-country runs with pistol target shooting. She also started training last fall at the San Diego Fencing Center in Escondido.
In early January, she competed in all five sports for the first time at a West Coast Pentathlon camp in Palm Springs, where she won a silver medal in the Youth A division and earned a spot in the USA Pentathlon program. Pat Duffy, president of West Coast Pentathlon, said Cindy stood out in her riding, her swimming and her desire to win.
“A determined athlete succeeds because they’re focused, they have the ability to concentrate, and they set goals for themselves,” Duffy said.
In June, Cindy competed in the Youth Nationals at the U.S. Olympic Training Center in Colorado Springs, Colorado. She earned a silver medal in the Youth C division, was ranked first on the West Coast in the equestrian division and ranked 10th overall in the nation. Duffy said that’s a pretty astonishing finish for someone who just started training in three of the five sports last fall.
This fall, Cindy will start her freshman year at Fallbrook High, where she’ll swim on Redmond’s girls team.
Training for pentathlons is expensive and a near-full-time pursuit for Cindy and her parents. Cindy said she never forgets the odds she has overcome to go from foster care to Olympic hopeful in just five years. To pay it forward, she and her parents organized their own pentathlon camp at the family ranch two months ago for 20 children in foster care. The kids rode horses, tossed water balloons and fenced with foam pool noodles.
“I did it because I wanted to show them what I’ve learned,” Cindy said. “I was once in the position they are, and I know how it feels to not have a dream. With the right support and love, they can have an awesome dream.”
      
      