BEIJING, China — On Monday, China sent two of its astronauts into space. This will be the nation's longest mission involving humans. 
The pair wants to dock with a lab in space and remain aboard there for 30 days. This is an important step in China's plans to run its own space station by 2022. It is also part of the country's much larger plans for its space program. China wants to put astronauts back on the moon and land an unmanned rover on Mars.
Government-controlled China Central Television (CCTV) news station showed the launch. The Shenhzou-II spacecraft took off from a launch center on the edge of the Gobi Desert in northern China early Monday morning. Shenzhou is Chinese for "divine vessel." It was carried by a Long March-2F, a Chinese space rocket.
The two astronauts were seen on board saluting seconds before takeoff. They will dock with the orbiting Tiangong-2 space lab in two days. Tiangong means "heavenly palace" in Chinese. There, they will run a series of tests on the computers and other important systems, CCTV reported.
Hopes Of Becoming A Space Power
The launch was declared a success. Defense Minister Fan Changlong read a congratulatory message from Chinese President Xi Jinping. The speech called for China's astronauts to explore space "more deeply and more broadly."
The message also encouraged people to keep breaking new ground. They hope to advance the space program and turn China into a space power. 
One of the astronauts was Jing Haipeng. He will turn 50 during the trip. He is flying his third mission. The other astronaut was Chen Dong, who is 37.
Jing said it was part of any astronaut's dreams to take part in many space missions. The government-controlled news agency, Xinhua, reported his statement.
China Will Build Its Own Space Station
China is spending heavily on a space program that aims to catch up with established space powers the United States and Russia. It is also trying to beat Asian competitors in India and Japan. Like all those countries, China's space program gives the country great pride.
China was kept from participating in the International Space Station because the U.S. was concerned. The Chinese space program also has military goals. 
Instead, China aims to build its own space station, a space people could live in long-term that orbits the Earth. It hopes that other countries will also launch missions there. The country insists that its plans are peaceful.
"Shenzhou-11 is a new beginning," said Zhang Yulin. He helps run China's space program. He also develops weapons for the government.
Regular Space Missions Are In The Future
Zhang said China hopes to carry out regular space missions after 2020. It wants to send astronauts, engineers and even tourists into space several times a year. In 2024, it will be the only country running a space station. That year, the International Space Station will retire.
China sent its first astronaut into space in 2003. Then it landed a kind of spacecraft called a rover, named the Jade Rabbit, on the moon. This was the first "soft landing" there in nearly 40 years. Soft landings are when the spacecraft makes it through the landing unharmed. The Jade Rabbit, though, later began to break down. 
China hopes to land a rover on the dark side of the moon by 2018, and then send an unmanned vehicle to Mars by 2020, copying the U.S. Viking landers in 1976.
Ultimately China wants to land an astronaut on the moon by about 2025. This would be more than 50 years after Neil Armstrong became the first man to walk on the moon.
The current mission will stretch for 33 days in all. It is more than twice the length of China's last 15-day manned mission, in 2013.
      
      