Summer is approaching, and many people will be hitting the local pool. Despite the warm weather, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) still sent out a warning. The agency says that at many public pools, people might find bits of fecal matter, dangerous chemicals and tiny creatures that cause disease.
A new report warns that nearly 8 in 10 public pool inspections found at least one safety violation. About 1 in 8 of these inspections found problems so serious that the pool had to be closed immediately.
These disheartening numbers are based on more than 80,000 routine inspections. The CDC report looked at nearly 50,000 public pools and other "aquatic venues" in Arizona, California, Florida, New York and Texas. These states are home to 40 percent of the nation's public water play areas.
Hundreds Were Sickened At Ohio Water Park
In 2013, the CDC created a group to keep track of the safety of public pools. In the 35 years before, 650 outbreaks at public pools were reported to the CDC. The largest of these happened at an indoor water park in Ohio in 2007. Chlorine mixed with sweat and urine in the pool water to create chemicals called chloramines. Local health authorities counted 665 cases of eye and respiratory tract problems among visitors and lifeguards.
None of this is to say that Americans should stay away from public pools. On the contrary, swimming "improves physical and mental health," wrote Michele C. Hlavsa and her partners at the CDC. What's more, they added, water-based exercise might be the only option for people with certain medical conditions.
Besides, swimming is a hugely popular pastime in this country. According to the government, more than 50 million Americans over the age of 6 went swimming at least six times a year. And public pools are everywhere, from water parks and hotels to apartment buildings and fitness clubs. If these pools aren't safe, a lot of people could suffer.
Most Pools Had Problems
This is what led the CDC to develop the Model Aquatic Health Code. Hlavsa and her co-authors set out to test how well the nation’s five biggest public pool states were measuring up to the code.
Here’s some of what they found:
—79 percent of routine inspections turned up at least one code violation.
—The number of violations per inspection ranged from 0 to 21. The median number of violations was 2.
—12 percent of routine inspections found a violation that resulted in the immediate closing of the pool.
—Among the most common violations were problems with a pool’s pH level, safety equipment and concentration of disinfectants.
The nearly 50,000 pools included in the study aren't necessarily like all public pools in the country. That means the CDC results don't apply to all states or venues, the authors wrote. Even among the five states that participated in the study, some counties shared more inspection records than others.
Improving Pools Should Prevent Illness, Injury
Still, the authors of the study stand by their results. They believe U.S. pools need to be improved "to prevent illness and injury."
So what's a swimmer to do? The CDC's advice is to visit a pool supply or hardware store and stock up on test strips that can measure the pH and disinfectants in the water. The pH level measures the acidity of the water. A healthy pool has a pH between 7.2 and 7.8. The concentration of chlorine should be at least 1 part per million (ppm) in regular pool water and at least 3 ppm in a hot tub. For bromine, the concentration in pool water should be at least 3 ppm, and at least 4 ppm in a hot tub.
      
      