When it comes to classroom behavior, black and white children are not treated equally. Research released in June showed that black students are nearly four times as likely to be suspended as white students, and nearly twice as likely to be expelled.
In addition, researchers recently found that black preschoolers are 3.6 times more likely to get suspended from school. The reason for this? Scientists at Yale Child Study Center at Yale University in Connecticut blame implicit bias.  
Bias is a prejudice in favor or against one group or person, which often results in treating some people unfairly. When the bias is implicit, it is understood, though not stated clearly or directly.
Classroom Behavior Study Revealed Biases
Implicit biases show up as subtle, sometimes subconscious stereotypes held by white teachers. They were shown to expect less from black students because of unfair and untrue beliefs about all students of color. Implicit bias also results in fewer black kids being recommended to programs for gifted students. Yale’s study revealed that biases are directed at much younger children than previously thought. Researchers also found implicit bias in both black and white teachers.
Professor Walter Gilliam led the study. He showed 135 educators videos of a black boy and girl, and a white boy and girl in a classroom setting. The teachers were told the following:
"We are interested in learning about how teachers detect challenging behavior in the classroom. Sometimes this involves seeing behavior before it becomes problematic. The video segments you are about to view are of preschoolers engaging in various activities. Some clips may or may not contain challenging behaviors. Your job is to press the enter key on the external keypad every time you see a behavior that could become a potential challenge."
While the teachers were asked to detect challenging behavior, no such behavior existed in any of the videos. Yet, when asked which children required the most attention, 42 percent of the teachers identified the black boy.
In addition to answers from the teachers, researchers used eye-tracking technology during the study. The results noted that preschool teachers “show a tendency to more closely observe black students, and especially boys, when challenging behaviors are expected.” The participants’ own answers about which student needed the most attention led to almost the same results.
Shutting Off The "School-To-Prison Pipeline"
Allison R. Brown is executive director of the Communities for Just Schools Fund, an organization that works to combat the “school-to-prison pipeline.” Her group works to stop black kids from getting expelled or suspended at higher rates than white kids. She found the results heartbreaking but not surprising. The study report states that “black bodies are policed in the streets and in the classroom." It goes on to say that research demonstrates that black boys are viewed as four and five years older than they actually are. 
The study also says that the biggest racial differences in school discipline exist in subjective categories, where different people might experience the same thing in different ways. Examples of this are willful defiance, insubordination and disrespect. 
Those race differences decrease significantly for the more objective categories such as possession of alcohol on campus. Possession of drugs with intent to distribute and possession of a loaded weapon are also examples of objective categories. They are objective because either students possessed the contraband or they did not, whereas the subjective categories could be more based on opinion.
Arming Teachers With Information
Brown worries that the study is saying the same thing as the news headlines, that some people are viewing black people as less than human. They treat them as if they do not deserve dignity and respect.
The study's results partially confirmed Brown's anxiety. However, they show that black children are not the only ones affected, children of other races are, too. Researchers found that when teachers were given information about the disruptive child's home life and family stressors, they were only more empathetic if the teacher and the student shared the same race. Otherwise, teachers were even harsher on the student. Scientists suspected it was because teachers felt powerless if they were not the same race as the student.
“These findings suggest that teachers need support in understanding family struggles as they may relate to child behaviors, especially when the teacher and child are of different races,” Gilliam says.
The good news is that teachers are willing to work at it. Gilliam pointed out that when he gave teachers the opportunity to withdraw their results from the study, only one person chose to do so.
Gilliam recommends anti-bias training programs and suggests consulting the work done by Howard Stevenson on racial literacy and racial climate in schools. Stevenson is a professor at the University of Pennsylvania.
Getting Past The Visuals
Lauren Owen is a white teacher and recent graduate of Harvard Graduate School of Education. She wrote an essay on the need for empathy in teaching. In the essay, Owen describes race as a category that is easy to identify with because it is visible. "I think it’s tough to get past visual indicators of sameness or different-ness because they are reinforced too frequently, and so it’s easier to empathize when we have similar experiences with someone who looks the same as us,” Owen says.
Gilliam is hopeful and says that educators, who are paid very little, pursue teaching because they love children. He tells parents of black children not to wait until biases build up, but instead be proactive and get to know teachers and staff.
"In all of my years of studying this issue, I’ve never seen a case where a child was expelled or suspended from a childcare or preschool setting when the parents and teachers knew and liked each other," Gilliam says.
      
      