Almost one-tenth of children in England have not gone out into nature in at least 12 months, a new study says. They have not set foot in a park, forest or any other natural area.
The problem is worse for children from poor families and black homes. They are much less likely than white children and those from wealthier homes to visit wild places often, according to the study. The same is true for Asian and other minority children.
Three-quarters of children younger than 16 from white homes visited nature at least once a week, the study said. Only half of children from minority homes did. 
“There’s a lack of role models,” said David Lindo, who is a birdwatcher living in the city. “In the last 10 years I’ve seen a slight increase in black birdwatchers but still nowhere near as much as there should be." Nature is still shown on television as a white hobby, said Lindo, who works as a broadcaster and is black.
Parents: Part Of The Solution, Part Of The Problem
More children visited nature when their parents were also interested in nature. In homes where adults were frequent visitors, 8 in 10 children experienced nature. In homes where adults rarely or never visited nature, only 4 of 10 children did.
Natalie Johnson works for the Wild Network. The group tries to get children to spend more time outside. Different things keep different children away from nature. It depends on where the children live. Out in the country, busy roads are the biggest problem, Johnson said. Inner-city youngsters stay indoors because they are afraid of gangs, she added.
Parents are the problem in the suburbs, she said. It is tough to convince parents that it is as important for children to spend time playing outside as it is to take language or dance lessons, Johnson said.
Parents just need to let children have time to find nature in the city, Johnson said.
Some Children Still Play Outside
Children actually do still play outside. According to the study, one-quarter of children went out into nature without adults. Many of them do so every week.
Findlay Wilde is 13. He writes about wildlife on the Internet. Too many parents stopped taking children into nature when they got out of elementary school, he said. Schools also stopped teaching about nature that much as children got older, he said.
In high school, children might think being interested in nature is "uncool." Parents need to keep taking their children outdoors if they can, he said.
Groups that protect nature, or conservation groups, should help, Wilde said. They should send thousands of volunteers into the schools to help teachers and students explore and enjoy nature.
Schools Don't Help Much
The study found very few children visited nature with their schools. Conservationists said the study might be wrong. Parents were asked questions for the study. The parents might not be aware of nature work in schools, such as creating wildflower areas on school grounds, they said.
A British wildlife group is offering free wildlife classes for students and teachers. The lessons are at schools in 15 big cities.
A U.S. study last year said that environmental groups are not good at promoting non-white people and women. They do a worse job than businesses and sports.
British conservationists said they were very aware of the problem in their groups.
Lindo said he did not blame conservation charities for blacks and other minorities not visiting nature. He said there needed to be more minority examples on wildlife TV. 
Tim Hill is chief scientist for the group that conducted the study. He said the results showed it was important to have green spaces near families. Those spaces can even be local parks, he said.
      
      