LONDON, England — For the past several weeks, Britain had no idea who would be its next leader. The country's prime minister was leaving. It was unclear who would take over. The struggle to pick a new leader was getting nasty. 
On Wednesday evening, Britain got its answer. The country's new prime minister is Theresa May, 59. 
May is becoming prime minister at a tricky time. Britain is about to leave the European Union (E.U.). 
The E.U. is a group of 28 European countries. Each country can easily trade with all the others. People from each country can easily move to any other country.
Picked By Conservative Party
Just last month, Britain voted to leave the E.U. The vote was very close. Many British people are not at all happy about leaving the E.U. 
There are people who wanted to leave. Those who wanted to leave say there are too many foreigners in Britain. They say foreigners take away jobs from British people.
The special vote was called a referendum. After the referendum, Prime Minister David Cameron said he would stop being prime minister. He had been trying to keep Britain in the E.U.
It took several weeks before May was picked as Cameron's replacement. First, there was a power struggle among several men who wanted the job. May was picked by the Conservative Party in England. This party now has the power in the country. 
No Turning Back
Many British people feel leaving the E.U. is a big mistake. They worry about working with E.U. countries. They think trading goods with them could be harder now. Britain may become poorer, they say.
May was against Britain leaving the E.U. Still, she said there is no turning back. The vote was fair and should be stuck to, she said.
May told the nation not to worry. She said Britain will continue to do well outside the E.U. 
May also promised to make Britain a fairer country. Britain must be a good place "for every one of us," she said. She said she would do her best to help the poor.
Follows Margaret Thatcher
May is only the second woman to become Britain's prime minister. The first was Margaret Thatcher. She left office more than 25 years ago.
Before beginning her new job, May met with the queen of England. Her name is Queen Elizabeth II. The queen no longer has real power. Still, prime ministers must meet with her before taking office.
Queen Elizabeth invited May to become prime minister. When May said yes, she became Britain's new leader.
      
      