SPARKS, Md. — Lexi, Lucas and Devin Goodman wander up the two-level staircase and through a trapdoor. Inside is a child’s dream room. The walls are painted white, their names in red, yellow and blue letters with several of their handprints to match. In the middle of the room is the trunk of a large oak tree.
It is their very own tree house — and it’s not just a few pieces of wood nailed to some branches. The tree house is a 12-foot-high octagon that floats on wooden beams. It's hard to believe that it all started with their father’s sketch on a paper napkin.
Barrett Goodman, 45, of Sparks, decided to build the tree house after remembering his own as a child.
“I enjoyed it when I was growing up,” he said. “I decided we’d build it all together.”
But tree houses these days are very different from what they were when Goodman was a kid.
Tree Houses Go Way Beyond DIY
With TV shows like Animal Planet’s “Treehouse Masters” and DIY Network’s “The Treehouse Guys,” there has been an increase in tree houses in the past five years, said Tanya Breck, a designer and project manager at Tree Top Builders Inc. in Pennsylvania. They definitely are not just a do-it-yourself project anymore.
People are turning to companies like Tree Top Builders to help them create elaborate backyard structures. They cost from $10,000 to close to $100,000 for large-scale tree houses with plumbing and electricity.
The newest trend is building tree houses to rent out overnight, but Breck said that many people are just building tree houses for their children and family.
That’s what Goodman was hoping to achieve when he reached out to Tree Top Builders and its sister company, Treehouse Supplies, in 2010.
The Comforts Of Home
Over the course of four months and with the help of a couple of builders, the Goodman family built their dream tree house. It is made out of wood and has a recycled plastic shingle roof, five screened windows, two working doorbells, electrical outlets, a front door and two hammocks on the inside. Outside, there’s a tire swing and a “milk and cookie” zip line. A bucket on a set of wires sends treats from their home’s back deck to the treetop dwelling.
Inside, three painted hard hats are nailed to the wall, a testament to the children’s involvement in this labor of love.
“We just like to hang out,” Lexi, 10, said while sitting in a hammock inside the tree house.
Sometimes there are bugs, 8-year-old Lucas, said, and Devin, 14, notes that they have seen squirrels.
Goodman said the tree house cost between $20,000 and $25,000. In Breck’s experience with Tree Top Builders, this is around the average amount people spend for a tree house.
The kids “use it every time a new friend comes over,” Goodman said. “That’s when it’s really the coolest thing in the world.”
Building Is Bonding Time
But the process wasn’t without hiccups. Just a week before work started, the tree Goodman was looking to use fell to the ground, and builders had to check out another tree to see if it could support the tree house.
Luckily, the tree that was used has remained sturdy for nearly six years.
“It’s weathered a couple of hurricanes, and it does just fine,” Goodman said. “It was a lot of fun to build with the kids. It’s something they certainly won’t forget.”
The tree house that Ken Kinard, 45, and his family built in Lutherville, Maryland, seven years ago was also a family bonding experience.
Kinard’s son Benjamin, who was 6 at the time, wanted to learn more about architecture, so the family decided to build a tree house.
With the help of local architect Jack Leonard — and friends — they built an elaborate structure. It includes hammocks, a yellow slide and bright electrical tube lights lining the inside.
"Prime Spot For Imagination"
The house was constructed using two large trees in the backyard, linking one tree to the other with a wooden bridge platform. One tree supports the airy tree house, which can be reached by rope ladder.
It took the family nearly three years working on the weekends and in their spare time to build the tree house, Kinard said.
The neighborhood christened the tree house with a giant water battle complete with squirt guns, hoses and water bazookas. Summertime sleepovers followed soon after.
“It’s a prime spot for imagination,” Kinard said.
The Kinards said goodbye to the tree house when they sold their home in 2012. But Kinard said the backyard structure was popular with would-be buyers.
“Who wouldn’t want such a tree house?" he said. "It was the envy of the neighborhood children.”
Now the tree house belongs to Phirun Mindel, 38, her husband and sons, Matthew, 3, and Harrison, 5. They moved in in September and have made use of the tree house in the warmer months, including a Halloween-themed birthday party for Harrison in October.
“It was a draw for us,” Mindel said. "They use it a lot.”
This tree house has bugs, according to Harrison. But “if you don’t bother them, then they won’t bother you,” he yelled before sliding down the spiral slide one recent evening.
      
      