HONOLULU, Hawaii - Marine biologist Richard Pyle was scuba diving in the Pacific last June when he spied a tiny fish the size of a toy race car. Googly-eyed and blush pink, it had a bluish red splotch on its dorsal fin.
To Pyle's expert eye, it was a peculiar marking, something he had never seen. Curious, he collected the fish for a closer look and also consulted with a team aboard a National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) research vessel.
"One Of Those Eureka Moments"
"It was one of those eureka moments," said Pyle, who is with Hawaii's Bishop Museum. He and everyone else became convinced that the creature was indeed a new species.
But what to call it? Pyle decided the red splotch looked like the logo of Barack Obama's 2008 presidential campaign. He did admit, though, "it takes a lot of imagination to see that resemblance."
Obama's home state has not named anything in his honor during his presidency. That changed when the fish became the newest member of the basslet family Tosanoides obama.
Fish Species Found In Marine Sanctuary
Pyle found the species during a dive in the Papahanaumokuakea Marine National Monument off Kure Atoll. It is the northernmost Hawaiian island, 1,200 miles northwest of Honolulu. Part of the reason for its name was to persuade the president to expand the marine refuge, which President George W. Bush created a decade ago.
In late August, Obama quadrupled Papahanaumokuakea's size to 582,578 square miles, making it the largest protected area on the planet. It is now twice the size of Texas. Commercial fishing and other activities are banned throughout the monument.
The researchers did not seek the 44th president's permission before submitting the name to the International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature for approval. The commission approves names for new species. There are four other species that have already been named after him. Those include a trapdoor spider, a speckled freshwater darter, a parasitic worm and an extinct lizard.
Bush, Others Also Received Honor
President George W. Bush has also been recognized by the scientific community. In 2005, two former Cornell University entomologists named a newly discovered slime-mold beetle Agathidium bushi, after Bush. They also named two other insects for Former Vice President Richard B. Cheney and Former Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld.
The entomologists emphasized that they meant it as a sign of respect for the Republican leaders. Pyle said the same idea applied to Obama's fish, and he timed the announcement to coincide with Obama's last vacation on Oahu as president.
"It's definitely an honor, not an insult, on our side," Pyle said.
Tosanoides obama is the only fish known to live exclusively within Papahanaumokuakea.
Five "Obama" Fish Have Been Found
Since June, scientists have found just five of them living along the limestone ledges of ancient shorelines. Scientists say there is reason to believe that most of the fish exist below 300 feet. That is the depth that can safely be explored by divers, and could be part of the reason researchers are only now beginning to find them.
Their tiny size makes them a perfect snack for larger fish that roam Papahanaumokuakea. But these plankton-eaters swim in silence, which helps protect them from predators.
"It's a tough place to be a small fish," Pyle said. "Big fish will eat these guys like popcorn."
Many scientists had pushed to expand the monument because it would offer additional protection for species there that are at risk from climate change, fishing and other threats. Without additional restrictions, they warned, seabed mining could take place and damage the region's coral reefs.
Seabirds Frequent Hawaiian Islands
The Northwestern Hawaiian Islands are the planet's largest seabird gathering site, with more than 14 million birds from 22 species. Since 1909, seven presidents have safeguarded these islands. They also are home to nearly all Laysan albatrosses and endangered Hawaiian monk seals, along with many shark species and the world's oldest living animal, a black coral estimated to be 4,500 years old.
NOAA scientist Randall Kosaki, who was aboard the ship when Pyle found the fish, noted that it lives in the outer edge of a long string of atolls and islands. If the corals are harmed by climate change, it would mean "there's no next place or next plan" for bringing back the species.
Hawaii's aquatic diversity has been closely studied for well over a century, which makes the discovery of any new species in its waters highly unusual. But that is changing as researchers use advanced scuba gear to dive far deeper.
NOAA has conducted six research expeditions to Papahanaumokuakea, and Kosaki said the teams brought back 75 species of algae that are probably new to science.
"It's kind of like the new frontier," he said. "You're diving on reefs that no human has ever laid eyes on."
      
      