NAIROBI, Kenya — The last time the lions charged through Simon Saigilu's village, he was ready. He jumped out of bed with a flashlight and a spear. His high-pitched scream was the closest thing anyone here had to an alarm.
He'd had time to practice. For every month or two, the lions would sneak through the electric fence that runs between the village and Nairobi National Park. In 1946, it became East Africa's first national park. Today there is no electricity in the fence. So the animals, including the park's 35 lions, leave the park.
This clash between humans and animal ecosystems is nothing new in much of Africa.  Tall buildings rise in places that were once grassy plains or forest. The city of Nairobi struggles to preserve wildlife while the population has grown from 30,000 to 3 million.
Saigilu's Maasai Village of wooden huts and sheet-metal homes is next to city warehouses and factories. On the other side is a 45-square-mile forest. It is the world's only major game reserve within a capital city. The park brings over 100,000 tourists to Nairobi every year.
Connected In The Circle Of Life
For years, being close to the park's wildlife was rarely a problem. Then a few things changed. The southern edge of the park once bordered a large grassy plain. But today, there are houses and shopping centers. Suddenly, when animals moved south, they found people. The people had weapons. Male lions are very territorial. Each requires as much as 100 square miles. With less land, the lions began to look elsewhere. One of the places they looked was Maasai Village, where people have been raising livestock for more than 50 years. Meanwhile, alongside the village, a 300-mile railway line to the Indian Ocean is being built. It is one of the biggest city projects in Kenya's history. The construction started more than a year ago and the electric fence lost power. This made it much easier for lions to escape.
One night in March, a villager lost 96 sheep to a lion attack.
"When they figure out how easy it is to kill livestock, they're going to keep doing it," said Paula Kahumbu, of WildlifeDirect.
The government said the power does not go out often. But during repeated visits to the fences by a reporter, the power was always out.
A lion named Mohawk for his unusual mane, escaped into nearby Kajiado town and had to be shot.
Sharing The Same Home
The people of the Maasai Village are frustrated by the lions that keep coming. The government gave them "lion lights. These high-beam lights are attached to poles and huts to scare off the animals, but they don't seem to work.
Lions killed one of Elena Nkuluto's cows, she said, and another family's three goats. Other times, people say, lions got through the fence but didn't attack any animals. No one in the village was hurt, but about 15 miles away, a man was killed by a lion in early August.
In 2013, the Kenyan government passed a law that promised to pay farmers for  livestock killed by wild animals, but no one in Maasai Village has been paid.
The government has said they don't believe the high number of lion attacks and wonder how often the animals are just stolen. They suggest the villagers are lying to get money from the government.
Be Prepared
Now, Kenyan leaders are debating what to do to protect the humans and animals living on both sides of the fence. They are thinking about a program that would move the people out of the villages.
Those in Maasai Village are very angry about the plan.
"We've been here for so many years," said Saigilu. "Why should we move?"
Other Kenyan leaders are planning to move some of the lions.
"There are efforts underway to decide whether lions should be moved to other parts of the country," said Paul Uduto. He is a spokesman for Kenya Wildlife Service that knows these attacks must be stopped.
The Maasai people live in Kenya and Tanzania, and have always raised livestock. They have had a tense relationship with lions. As part of their warrior ways and culture, Maasai boys have long been expected to track and kill a lion with a spear. This proves they are men.
That tradition and way of life has continued less as the lion population has gotten smaller. Some Maasai now hunt in groups, killing fewer lions, while others have given up lion-hunting. Some Maasai now follow a new tradition of long-distance running as a new way to show they are men.
But in Maasai Village, young men appear intent on killing lions to protect theirs farms, so each of them keeps a spear ready.
"When it becomes necessary, we will use them," Saigilu said.
      
      