The government says roadside zoos need to stop letting people play with lions. Roadside zoos are small and keep animals in cages at the side of roads. They often include large wild cats such as tigers and lions. People pay the zoos a lot of money to feed and play with the large cats.
Animal rights groups have asked the government to stop the use of cubs for entertainment. For large amounts of money, zoos have allowed people to play with large cats. These cats include tigers, lions, leopards and cheetahs. People could have their picture taken holding, playing with or feeding the cats.
Now, the government will not allow very young cubs to be used for this purpose. It would go against the Animal Welfare Act, a law that protects animals. Cubs younger than 4 weeks old cannot be removed from their mothers. They must be sheltered properly. They cannot be held by zoo visitors, only by people who work for the zoo.
Cubs Pulled Away From Mothers
Animal rights groups say this hurts the cubs. Seventy-five roadside zoos have removed hundreds of cubs from their mothers. The zoos did this to allow visitors to play with them. This stops the cubs from having regular feedings with their mother. It also changes their behavior.
The Humane Society is an animal rights group. The Humane Society found two zoos where cubs were being abused. Cubs were abused at Natural Bridge Zoo in Virginia and Tiger Safari in Oklahoma. The cubs were punched and smacked. They were hit to prevent them from playfully scratching or biting people.
These Cubs Are Money Makers
One cub was used for 30 photos and five 30-minute play periods in one day. The Humane Society said visitors paid $50 for a photo. It was $300 for a play period. One cub could earn the zoo $65,000 in a single summer.
Anna Frostic is a lawyer at the Humane Society. Frostic said zoos take cubs away from their mother right away. This makes it easier to get the cub used to humans. Away from their mothers, cubs do not have regular feeding. Frostic said taking a young cub away from its mother is cruel.
Zoos that let people handle big cats have to obey the Animal Welfare Act. Roadside zoos are not members of larger zoo groups, though. These large groups force the zoos that are members to keep cubs with their mothers.
Government Watching Roadside Zoos
Frostic said the government is now warning these roadside zoos. If they do not follow the law, they will be brought to court and punished.
Bad treatment of large cats affects more than their well being. Once the cubs have grown up, they are often handed off to larger zoos. These zoos have to find space and money to care for the grown-up cats. This can also increase tiger poaching.
Leigh Henry is a wildlife expert at World Wildlife Fund. Henry said he thinks the treatment of captive tigers in the United States affects tigers in the wild. U.S. captive tigers need to be protected better, Henry said. This will prevent parts from tigers born in the United States from being sold illegally on the black market. When parts from tigers born in the U.S. are sold on the black market, it creates more demand for them. This means people are willing to pay for them. Then, hunters poach more wild tigers.
      
      