ANCHORAGE, Alaska — Cynthia Erickson woke up early. She hoped her four furnaces were working.
Coldest Place In A Cold State
Erickson lives in Tanana, Alaska. She owns a grocery store and the building that houses the post office. Her village ranked as the coldest place in the state Wednesday. The temperature at the airport was minus 54 degrees. Nearby, along the Yukon River, it was 5 degrees colder.
"Fifty-nine below on Front Street in Tanana, Alaska," she said, laughing. "I hate everybody who lives in a warm place."
The cold weather is bothering even people like Erickson who have lived in the area a long time. She didn't see a customer until 25 minutes after she opened her store.
Planes Don't Fly; Cars Don't Drive
"I'm good because I watch the temperatures and prepare," she said. "Living your whole life in Alaska for 53 years, you've got to think ahead."
Planes were not flying in the village 130 miles west of Fairbanks, Alaska's second-largest city. The cold also kept cars off the road, Erickson said. Instead, people walked, bundled up against the cold.
She's hoping for a break in the weather — perhaps a nice, warm minus 20 degrees. Temperatures are supposed to remain cold into Friday.
Blame It On Siberia
The cold weather is coming from Siberia, said Christopher Cox, who works for the National Weather Service.
Areas to the middle and west of Alaska have been in the minus 40s, he said.
Fairbanks's airport reached -50 on Wednesday. It was the first time since January 29, 2012, Cox said.
The city craves clouds when it gets so cold. From November through January, Cox said, sunlight has little effect on temperatures. Clouds help contain the heat rising up from the Earth's surface.
A Blanket Of Clouds
"Think of it as a blanket," Cox said. "If you have no clouds, there's nothing to stop that radiation from escaping to outer space."
Last winter, the low in Fairbanks never reached -30. But that's not usual. Fairbanks averages 11 to 12 days of temperatures that reach 40 below zero or colder, Cox said.
Schools were still open. The school has a rule. Children can play outside unless it gets colder than minus 20.
Too Cold For Recess?
"If it's 19 below, they go out," said Lori Kunz, a woman who works at one of the schools in the area. Not as many kids came to school on Wednesday. They knew they'd have to play inside, Kunz said. 
The temperatures also affect cars and water pipes. Tires flatten on the bottom. This can lead to a bumpy ride. Changing a tire with bare hands can cause frostbite. If a furnace fails, water pipes can freeze. Then they might break when they've thawed.
In Tanana, Erickson said, oil used for cooking gelled in the cold. Stoves were impossible to use. People started shopping at her grocery store for food they could cook on wood stoves. Most people had water because of heating cable or tape on water lines, she said.
Pictures Of Summertime
Tanana also has been blessed with a lot of snow. In temperatures like this, snow is good.
It keeps the heat inside, Erickson said. People put it around their houses. "It helps with pipes, water lines and gas lines."
Erickson said being stuck inside is the worst part. She looks at summer pictures of boats, blueberries and kids swimming to help her make it through the day.
      
      