OAKLAND, Calif. — Corey Lever really liked trucks when he was a boy, and his favorite was the garbage truck. He loved to watch it roar down his street in Oakland, California, grabbing and emptying trash cans.
After graduating from high school, Lever bounced between jobs, working for various companies and attending community college. However, nothing was a good fit for energetic Lever, who loved being outside. He tried to become a garbage collector on his own, but was not hired.
Joint Effort To Train Drivers
Then Lever heard about Civicorps Recycling. This recycling service runs a training program that was created by Alameda County's Waste Management service and Oakland Civicorps, a group that helps students earn high school diplomas and get job training. Unions are also involved in the program. A union is an organization of workers formed to make sure that its members are treated fairly.
The training program gives young adults a chance to become truck drivers as Teamsters, members of a powerful union, after just two years. The trainees are often high school dropouts from low-income communities.
Alan Lessik is the executive director of Civicorps. He says the Civicorps and Waste Management partnership is the only garbage contract in the country to include a nonprofit job training program. 
Industry Short On Truck Drivers
The job-training program comes at a good time for the waste industry. It is currently struggling to find drivers. An industry group called American Trucking Associations (ATA) says that there are not enough qualified applicants with a commercial driver's license. In fact, the shortage has more than doubled since 2011. ATA's latest annual report says the nation was short roughly 48,000 drivers last year, and that the shortage will only increase in years to come.
The shortage has become more apparent as the economy picks up, says Barry Skolnick, Waste Management's area vice president for Northern California and Nevada. He says that if construction picks up, there will be more houses and longer routes, so more drivers will be needed. Skolnick says the need for more drivers is "really being driven by the economy. It's a great job with great benefits."
Trainees in the program work full time collecting recyclable materials from commercial businesses in Oakland.
Program Can Lead To Well-Paying Jobs
Last year, Civicorps created six apprenticeships in partnership with Waste Management. An apprentice is a person who learns a job or skill by working for a fixed period of time for someone who is very good at that job. The apprenticeships with Waste Management can lead to well-paying jobs.
Truck driver apprentices earn $20 an hour, and after two years they are eligible for union jobs. There, they could earn $70,000 annually while working toward a pension, Lessik said. A pension is a guaranteed monthly income after retirement.
Lever, now 25, has just finished his first year of training, and says he enjoys working for Civicorps Recycling. "This job is environmentally friendly, and I'm doing something that kids look up to," he says. "I couldn't get there by myself, and they helped me get there," he adds.
Even getting up at 2:45 a.m. and dealing with maggots and worse on the job does not seem to bother Lever. "I am thankful that they gave me this opportunity to do something I wanted to do," he says.
Job Helped Turn His Life Around
Will Montolla was once a high school dropout headed toward a life of crime in Oakland. He says the training program changed his life. "I was in the streets doing bad things," he says.
Montolla had run-ins with law enforcement and says he was not looking to get a job. "I made some real dumb decisions," he says. "All I was trying to be was the toughest street kid around."
He is now 28 years old, and a father. Through Civicorps Montolla earned a high school diploma and entered the truck-driving training program. 
"It's hard work and physically demanding," he says. "You are always watching out for cars and kids and people crossing the street, but I've learned how to work really hard." 
Montolla's determination has not gone unnoticed. 
Operations Manager Hector Abarca earned his high school diploma through Civicorps more than 20 years ago, and now has a good-paying job that supports his four children. He has been impressed with Lever and Montolla. "They've definitely set the bar high," he says. "The next guys who go over there have big shoes to fill."
Recycling Service Serves 800 Businesses
Civicorps Recycling runs five routes, serving more than 800 large businesses, including the University of California, Berkeley, Oakland International Airport, Mills College and the Oakland Unified School District. The recycling service also serves more than 750 small businesses in the area.
"It's really cool to watch these young adults enjoy what they are doing and get past anything that happened to them before," says Skolnick. "It's a great win-win for them and for us and for Civicorps, and a win-win for the city of Oakland."
      
      