MALHEUR NATIONAL WILDLIFE REFUGE, Ore. — Linda Beck is a fish biologist in charge of a struggle against millions of invasive carp. The fish have uprooted aquatic plants, severely reducing the food supply here for waterfowl.
During the winter, an armed group of men occupied the Malheur refuge for more than 40 days. As threats to federal employees escalated, Beck, who was in the middle of a key part of her project, left for Vancouver, Washingon. She left behind her rancher husband to take care of their cattle.
Meanwhile, the extremists who sought to transfer the refuge to local control claimed Beck’s desk, looking through her files and mocking her work. Someone also removed a pelican’s beak, a carp’s skeleton and a stuffed crow that Beck received from her grandmother.
Today, Beck is back on the job, working out of a temporary trailer office. The refuge occupation appears to have reinforced her sense of mission.
Putting It In Perspective
“It pretty much cemented in me that I was going to come back and conquer the carp,” Beck said. “It was a 41-day occupation, but it was a real small part of Malheur’s history.”
The occupation ended Feb. 11. The return of 16 full-time refuge staff has allowed the United States Fish and Wildlife Service to reopen the 187,757-acre refuge just as the number of birds is growing with the onset of spring.
The long-legged sandhill cranes are easy to spot as they strut about in fields looking for insects to eat. Snow geese by the thousands have arrived, bunching together in and around the refuge, and many more are on their way. The three-day Harney County Migratory Bird Festival begins April 8.
Refuge Gains Attention
The occupation spurred renewed interest in the 108-year-old refuge, a major stopover that is frequented by more than 320 bird species. There will be tours, an art show and other events to showcase the migration.
The refuge headquarters, which includes a visitor’s center and museum, remains off-limits to the public and is expected to stay closed until later in the year.
The damage came from the series of events touched off by the decision by extremist leader Ammon Bundy and a group of supporters to take over the refuge Jan. 2. Bundy is the son of Cliven Bundy, a Nevada rancher who led an armed standoff with federal agents in 2014 after he refused to pay fees to use federal lands.
The occupation was touched off by the fate of two Harney County ranchers who were sent back to prison in January after a federal court ruled that they should serve more time on arson charges. It became a broader rebellion against federal ownership of public lands in the West.
Respite For Protesters
Dozens of sympathizers occupied space throughout the headquarters area. Some just visited during the day, while others stayed for weeks, spending nights in a bunkhouse or sleeping on cots set up inside a firehouse and other buildings.
Most left hurriedly after the Jan. 21 arrests of Bundy and four others, and the shooting death of Arizona rancher LaVoy Finicum a few days later. Four people chose to remain at the headquartersand stayed there for 16 more days before surrendering.
Refuge officials said some buildings were damaged during the occupation, and the headquarters area was also littered with trash and piles of human waste.
All of that unfolded in an archaeological zone that contains Paiute Native American tribal artifacts.
Takeover Is Costly
Dan Ashe, the director of the Fish and Wildlife Services, said during a visit to the refuge that repairs so far have cost $1.7 million.
He said the agency also spent $2 million to move refuge employees to other places and another $2.5 million for increasing security at other refuges.
During the takeover, militias converged on Harney County. They created an environment so threatening to federal employees that the workers all either left the area or stayed away from their offices. There is still concern about extremists.
Some businesses also have had problems since the occupation.
The Narrows RV Park and cafe delivered food to the occupiers at the refuge. The cafe employees said the food was paid for in full, and that they also served plenty of other people, including law-enforcement officials.
“We even had a Super Bowl party for the FBI in here, and we stayed open late for them,” said Anna Surber, an employee at The Narrows.
Business Tails Off
Still, the feeding of the occupiers spurred angry emails from people who accused the business of supporting the takeover. Surber said spring bookings at the RV park are down, and that refuge staff who once frequented the cafe no longer stop for meals in what she perceives as a boycott.
For years, Fish and Wildlife officials have been working with local ranchers, tribes and environmentalists to agree on how to manage the Malheur refuge.
Some say the cooperation helped to prevent the extremists from getting more support from Harney County ranchers. In January, occupation leaders organized an event at refuge headquarters, but only one cattleman stepped onto the stage — and he was from Arizona.
“That’s the reason they didn’t gain traction,” said Chad Karges, the refuge manager. “Everyone was already working together.”
      
      