Melania Trump is married to Donald Trump, who is running for president. Melania Trump gave a speech at the Republican National Convention on Monday night. Republicans met at the convention to decide who they want to run for president. They chose Trump.
People said that some of the words Melania Trump used were copied from another speech. Michelle Obama gave a speech with many of the same words eight years ago. People are saying Melania Trump copied Michelle Obama's speech. 
Students Would Be In Big Trouble
If Melania Trump were a student, she would probably be in big trouble. Teachers say that she would probably have gotten an F for her speech. If she were a student, she might even have gotten expelled from school.
Josh Davis teaches English and journalism at a high school in Ohio. He said Trump's speech is cheating. High school students sometimes copy words too.
"Sure, some words were changed, but the shell is the same," Davis said.
Davis plans to vote for Hillary Clinton. Clinton will probably be the person that Democrats want to make president. Americans will get to vote for the next president in November. Most of them will probably vote either for Donald Trump or for Hillary Clinton.
Davis said other political groups have also copied. For example, Joe Biden ran for president in 1988. He might have copied words in a speech back then, too. Biden is now vice president.
Common Words And Values: Not Plagiarism?
Paul Manafort works for Donald Trump. He was on a TV news channel on Tuesday morning. He said that Melania Trump did not copy the words she used.
Manafort said Melania Trump used "common words and values that she cares about, her family, things like that." He said Melania Trump did not copy, because if she did she would easily get caught.
Aine Donovan is a professor at a college. She thinks Melania Trump must have copied. Donovan said some people don't think copying is a big deal.
"Somebody could say, 'Who cares about words?'" Donovan said. Donovan says that copying can lead to even worse things. It can damage someone's reputation.
One Journalist Had To Quit His Job Because Of Copying
Jayson Blair is very familiar with the danger of copying. He was a reporter for The New York Times newspaper. He had to quit his job because he copied words. He also made up stories for many of his articles. Journalists take this very seriously. They are supposed to write stories based on facts, not make them up.
Blair said he now talks to students about why copying is a bad idea.
Copying makes it look like "you're willing to take from others without giving credit. It makes you seem as if you don't have original ideas," Blair said.
Blair can never get another job as a journalist, because of what he did.
A few years ago, a professor called Jayson Blair. The professor wanted advice after catching a student copying. The professor decided not to get the student expelled. Instead, the student got an F. 
It looks like the student learned his lesson. He still works in journalism today, Blair said.
      
      