HONOLULU, Hawaii — Disney will stop selling a costume from its new movie "Moana." The costume is of a Polynesian figure named Maui. The costume upset many Pacific Islanders, or people who are from, or whose ancestors are from island nations in the Pacific Ocean.
Some Pacific Islanders view Maui as an ancestor. He is an important figure to them. The costume of him has a long-sleeve brown shirt and long pants. Tattoos or skin designs cover the body. The costume has a necklace that looks like a shark tooth and a green-leaf "skirt."
Disney Is Sorry
The company stopped selling the costume. It also stopped selling pajamas and a T-shirt with the same design. 
Disney released a statement. It said it was sorry some were offended by the costume. It said it worked hard to respect the people of the Pacific Islands. It said it would stop selling the costume.
Costume Is Disrespectful
Chelsie Haunani Fairchild is a Pacific Islander who is a native Hawaiian. She said she thought the costume was disrespectful. She said it looked like children wearing the skin of another race. She said the costume doesn't honor anyone. Instead, she said it makes fun of them. 
Fairchild was glad Disney said it was sorry. It didn't change what the company did, though. She said Disney only stopped selling the costume because people complained.
The animated movie "Moana" will come out in November. It is about a teenager named Moana. She sails through the South Pacific to a famous island. She meets Maui, who helps her explore the ocean.
Tattoos Have Important Meaning
Professor Tevita Kaili is from the Polynesian island of Tonga. Polynesia is one group of Pacific Islands. Kaili said he was happy Disney stopped selling the costume.
He said the meaning of the tattoos on the costume was lost. In Polynesia, chiefs and other important grown-ups wear these skin designs. 
He said some shapes symbolized sharks. Most children wearing the costume will not understand why sharks are important in Polynesia. Shark designs would normally be used by people who think sharks protect their families. On the costume, they just look like shapes.
Mighty Maui
Stories have been passed down about Maui. In the stories, he catches the sun or pulls islands out of the ocean. Kaili explained that these stories are not real. They  symbolize how Maui discovered new islands while sailing the ocean.
Kaili said that most people in the Pacific and Polynesia "see Maui as an important ancestor to us." To them, he is "a real person." He is not a character.
People across the world disliked the Disney costume.
Marama Fox is from New Zealand. She is Maori, or a member of a Polynesian tribe that is native to New Zealand. She said the costume was a case of cultural appropriation. In other words, a group in power was trying to make money by using the culture of a group without as much power. Disney was just trying to make money from the Pacific Islander culture.
      
      