ST. LOUIS, Mo. — Delanie Gallagher is 10 years old and is missing part of her left arm. She just received a new robotic arm and instructions for taking care of it. Don’t get it wet. Turn it off when you're not using it. Change the batteries.
No one told Delanie how she should use the robotic arm in daily life, though. It will be up to her to figure that out.
Scientists will be studying her as she uses the arm. They also want to figure out the best way to use it. 
Delanie is the first child to take part in a new study. Scientists from Washington University School of Medicine are doing the study. It will help scientists make an artificial, or fake, arm or leg that children can really use.
Most People With Missing Arms Don't Use A Fake One
Some children were born without a limb, or with only part of a limb. Others lost their limb in an accident or had it removed in an operation. 
More than 540,000 Americans have a missing arm. Only about 1 in 5 use an artificial arm, though. That's because these fake arms often don't work well. They just get in the way.
Regular artificial arms cost from $25,000 to $50,000. They are too expensive for growing children who may need a new arm each year.
Delanie’s new arm is different. It uses a new type of technology. It is called myoelectric technology. These are special sensors. They tell the fake hand to either open or close, or the wrist to turn.
3-D Printers Make Plastic Arms Much Cheaper
The scientists created the plastic arm using a 3-D printer. The 3-D printer works like a regular ink printer. It doesn't use ink, though. It builds objects by squirting melted plastic in layers. Delanie's arm cost just a few hundred dollars to make.
Nick Thompson is a scientist at Washington University. He hopes the new artificial arms will be cheaper and more useful to children. The scientists want to create a fake arm that can be made quickly and changed quickly.
Delanie has gotten along fine without an artificial arm, said her mom, Janet Gallagher. She remembered when Delanie was a baby and got her first fake arm to help her crawl. "She just dragged it along," Gallagher said.
"It didn’t help her," she said. "She could do better without it."
Delanie Does Better Without An Artificial Arm
Delanie has had two other artificial arms. She uses them only to ride her bike and hold up a fishing pole.
Delanie can do a lot without using a fake arm. She knows how to use her arm stump to color, cut with scissors and tie her shoes. She can braid her hair and play the piano.
At school, she raises her stump high when the teacher asks the class a question. 
Gallagher said Delanie sometimes worries about the future. She wonders how she will drive a car and if she will be able to take care of children.
These Fake Arms Are Bold And Unique
Delanie definitely likes how the new plastic arm looks. She suggested that it be bright pink. She named it Rosy Pink Petunia Gallagher.
Dr. Charles Goldfarb is a doctor at St. Louis Children’s Hospital. He cares for children with missing limbs.
Goldfarb said that most scientists have been trying to make artificial limbs that look like the real thing. Fake arms like Delanie's don't look like real arms at all, he said. "They look like superhero arms," he said. They are bold and unique.
"We're making arms that say, 'Hey, look at me. I’ve got a great, cool arm, and I’m not trying to hide it. It’s part of who I am,'" Goldfarb said.
This idea helps a lot of kids, he said.
      
      