MINNEAPOLIS, Minn. — Before a terrorism trial last week, a young high school teacher took a look at the people who were chosen as jurors. The group, he said, was filled with whiteness. The teacher was also a potential juror.
He wasn’t the only one to notice that the jury was white and the three defendants were Muslim and black. The government says the three men tried to join the Islamic State (IS) and gave help to it. The extremist group wants to start its own country under Islamic law. 
The jury will listen to all of the witnesses and the facts in the case. Then they will decide if the three men are guilty or not.
No Clear-Cut Answers
The effect of the jurors' race has been studied for many years. The question is anything but black and white.
“I think it would be a challenge to get a jury that considers all the factors when the jury is all white,” said Larry Leventhal. He is a lawyer who is not involved in the trial. But, he added, that does not mean a white jury cannot be fair.
U.S. District Judge John Tunheim said he couldn’t discuss the case. He said that in general Minnesota juries take their responsibilities very seriously. They carefully weigh the evidence, and reach fair decisions. He said there are many cases where minorities and other people of color were found innocent even when there were no minorities on the jury.
The matter was clearly on the mind of Judge Michael Davis, who is in charge of the trial. Davis questioned about 100 possible jurors last week, trying to determine whether anyone was biased. Davis is the state’s first black federal judge and has overseen other terrorism trials. He has a reputation for pushing for more minority jurors and court officials.
“Have you come in contact with minority groups?” he asked them. “Any negative experiences with African-Americans or people from another country, like say, Somalia, East Africa, Ethiopia and Kenya?”
Davis sent 10 people home on the first day who said they couldn’t be fair on terrorism charges.
At the same time, Davis told them: “You’re not a bad person if you have strong feelings one way or another.”
Former government lawyers said that all-white juries can be fair.
Some defense lawyers and members of Minneapolis’ Somali-American community were more doubtful.
Mother Wishes For More Diversity
“We wish the jury would have some diversity,” said Ayan Farah, mother of Mohamed Farah. He is one of the men on trial. To have no juror of color, she said, raised the question of what “kind of justice the family can expect. But we are hoping these jurors will see some of ... (the defendants) could be their brothers and sisters.”
Dan Scott is a former chief federal public defender, who represented people on trial. He said a key issue is not simply race. It is also important for the jury to understand what was in the defendants' minds.
He said that it can be hard for a juror to figure out a defendant from a completely different background.
“You’re dealing with a group of young men who are first-generation Americans caught between two worlds,” Scott added. “Maybe these kids are dedicated revolutionaries, maybe they are just confused and we don’t know that, and the jurors have no feel for it.”
Scott said he represented a Somali woman in one trial. A jury of no blacks and one Asian found her guilty. In another trial, a jury with two blacks found a Somali man guilty, said Jon Hopeman, who is a lawyer.
American law on the issue is quite clear. Juries must be drawn from the community, but there is no requirement that the race of the jury must reflect the community.
If you define fair as following the law, "the answer is yes, they can get a fair trial,” said Joseph Daly. He is a retired professor at Mitchell Hamline School of Law in St. Paul. “If you define fair as decision-making by people who look like you and (are) culturally similar to you, the answer is no."
      
      