Antarctica is a freezing cold place. It has giant sheets of ice. Many animals like the icy environment. There is a problem, though. Much of Antarctica's ice is melting.
Scientists think most of the heat is coming from below the surface of the ocean.
The ocean is divided into sheets of water. At the top are sheets of cool water. Deep below is a sheet of warm salty water. Scientists think this warm water has been sneaking up around Antarctica. It has been touching huge mountains of ice called glaciers. The warm water is melting the glaciers from below.
It is hard for scientists to see this happening. To do so, they have to dive deep into Antarctica's freezing waters. This is not an easy job.
Scientists found a clever way to solve this problem. Seals are helping them study the water.
Seals Swim With Sensors
Xiyue Zhang is the scientist who led the study. Her team worked with a special program. In the program, tags are put on southern elephant seals. The tags have sensors that save information about the water.
The sensors are attached to the seals' heads. They are so small that they do not change how the animals swim. The sensors measure how deep the ocean is. They also measure the temperature of the water. After the seals shed their old skin, the sensors fall off.
Southern elephant seals are amazing. They can stay underwater for up to two hours. They can also dive more than a mile deep. At the bottom of the ocean, they eat fish and squid. They spend most of their lives underwater.
Discovering Antarctica's Melt
The study used thousands of measurements to study Antarctica's water. Many of the measurements were taken in winter. During this season, it is hard for people to work in Antarctica because it is so cold.
The scientists found that warm water has been moving toward Antarctica. It has been mixing with cooler water. The mix forms underwater tornadoes. These move toward the icy coast. They warm the glaciers.
The scientists learned this from the seals. The animals swam near the glaciers. They recorded the temperature of the water. The water is warm enough to melt the ice, Zhang said.
Thanks to seals, the scientists know more about why Antarctica is melting. The study showed that warm water deep in the ocean can move. It can travel toward the glaciers. But there is still more to learn about this part of the ocean.
Fortunately, there is plenty more information from the seals.
      
      