D’IBERVILLE, Miss. — Pierson Feeney cannot wait for the school day to end. When the bell rings, he hops on the bus. He is excited to go to dance class.
Pierson is 11 years old. He goes to D’Iberville Middle School in Mississippi. Some of his classmates do not understand why Pierson loves to dance. Other kids sometimes make fun of him. They say dance is for girls.
Pierson says that most of the kids in his dance class are girls. But boys dance too, he adds. Besides, if anyone teases him, he just ignores them.
Pierson has something called ADHD. It stands for attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. People with ADHD have a hard time paying attention. They have trouble controlling their bodies.
"I Just Want To Keep Dancing"
Marsha Feeney is his mom. She really wanted to help her son. When he was 9, she saw that Pierson moved his feet all the time. She asked if he would like to take dancing lessons.
Pierson now goes to the Gulf Coast School of Performing Arts. He takes every class there. He takes ballet, jazz, hip-hop, modern dance, ballroom and house.
Now, Pierson is a different child, his mom says.
At first when he started, he did not know anything about dancing. It was really hard for him.
Pierson said he thinks dance helped him to get his ADHD under control. Dancing helps him to get out his feelings.
“I felt so good because I could actually do something,” he said. “Every time I dance, I feel something in my heart and my head."
"I just want to keep dancing," Pierson said. "It makes me feel really good about myself.
Regional Dancer Of The Year
Pierson’s hard work in dance class paid off this year. He won three awards at a dance contest. He also was named Regional Dancer of the Year.
Pierson remembered when his name was called. He had to pinch himself, he said.
“I just couldn’t believe it,” he said.
Pierson's mom said that “he has worked very hard, and it wasn’t just given to him.”
“When we pick him up at night, he is so tired," she said. "Just to win one award, we would have went home feeling like we had conquered the world,” she said.
Josh Burchette is one of Pierson's dance teachers. He said Pierson is an amazing dancer who deserves to be called dancer of the year. "I’m really proud of him,” Burchette said.
Feeney said Pierson’s father did not understand why Pierson loved to dance. Then he saw his son onstage and he changed his mind. Pierson said his father supports him and goes to see him dance all the time. 
Pierson said he hopes to become a dancer when he grows up.
      
      