Sisters Stellah Babirye and Joan Nakimuli sit either side of a chessboard on a wooden bench at their home in Katwe. They live in one of the largest and poorest neighborhoods in Uganda’s capital, Kampala.
Babirye, age 16, wants to go into politics. Nakimuli, 18, wants to be a lawyer. They stare at the chessboard intently. Nakimuli moves her king – but it’s a wrong move. Babirye captures her sister’s piece and both burst into laughter. “I told you a politician is bigger than a lawyer,” Babirye says.
The sisters learned to play chess at Katwe chess academy. It's one of five centers around Kampala that teach the game to young people.
Female Player Is Subject Of Movie
Uganda’s thriving chess scene is the subject of a new Disney film about Phiona Mutesi. She grew up there and went on to become perhaps the country’s top female chess player, nicknamed the Queen of Katwe. The film opened in the U.S. in September and comes out in Uganda this month.
Mutesi learned and played her first game at the Katwe chess academy, having wandered into the center at the age of 9, following her brother in search of a meal. She was fascinated by the beauty of the chess pieces, and by the concentration on the children’s faces as they played. That introduction led her to become entranced with the game. She went on to become the women’s junior champion of Uganda three times. In 2012, at the 40th chess Olympiad, Mutesi was named Woman Candidate Master, one of the country’s first female players to win such a title.
With money earned from championships, Mutesi has moved her family out of the poor neighborhood and into a new home. They left behind the unmarked two-room building on a dirt road where she learned her skills.
Academy Grows To 300 Children
At the academy, the chessboards are balanced on wobbly wooden benches. Everyone observes the unwritten rule that if someone loses a game, they give way to another player. Most of the children who play chess at the centers are unable to pay for their education, so the group sends them to formal schools.
Robert Katende, the academy’s founder, says it gives young people the chance of a new life. UNESCO estimates that 68 percent of children in Uganda drop out of school before the end of their primary education; the academy's goal is to keep young people in education and away from early marriage.
Katende, an engineer by training, played chess as a student, and thought that it would be a great way to keep young people engaged. He found a place in Katwe where the children could meet daily to play, and started up the academy. It began with five children, but the number has since swelled to more than 300. At ages from 5 to 23, the chess players gather daily across five separate locations around the capital.
The academy opens in the afternoon. Any young person can drop in for a game. Katende hires experienced chess players to teach, alongside older boys and girls from the academy who also provide coaching.
"Chess Is Like A Connection"
Chess helps young people with decision-making, Katende says. “A bad move in chess means you will lose. That is the same with life. You must think through your options before you make a move.”
For many children, chess has become a way to stay alive. At least 61 students – in primary and secondary education as well as at university – are receiving support from the academy in the form of paying for school, books and other school needs. The academy also provides lunch for those who come to play and a place to sleep for those with nowhere to live. This is very different from what other children in the neighborhood get. Many of them see education as a luxury and drop out of primary school.
“Chess is like a connection,” says Mutesi’s brother, Brian Mugabi. He is in the final year of school for electrical engineering. “Once you have completed school, the world is open for you."
A Source Of Inspiration
Together with their mother, Babirye and Nakimuli are among those who sleep at the academy, which also pays for school and helps with other education costs. To children playing chess in Kampala, Mutesi’s success is a source of motivation to keep their dreams alive. “She is inspirational,” Babirye says. “I too can make it.”
Babirye and Nakimuli can now dare to dream. With an education, a career in law or politics could be within their grasp.
      
      