After a spike of human cases of the plague in 2015, the number of occurrences last year dropped.
Four cases of human plague in 2016 were reported in New Mexico. The western state is one of several where the infectious bacterial disease is commonly found, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
Between 1900 and 2015, there have been 1,036 human plague cases in the United States. On average, about nine people in the country each year contract the plague, a disease known for ravaging populations around the world during Medieval times.
The disease destroyed an estimated 60 percent of Europe’s population in the 14th century and killed roughly 50 million more in Asia and Africa. The plague is now most common on the Indian Ocean island nation of Madagascar, where 95 percent of the world’s human cases are found. In 2015, there were 320 cases reported worldwide, including 77 deaths, according to the World Health Organization.
Western States Are Most Hospitable To Plague
Dr. Paul Mead is the chief of Epidemiology, Bacterial Diseases Branch with the CDC’s Division of Vector-Borne Diseases. He said the fluctuation in the number of human cases of the plague in the United States might be attributed to weather, when wet winters are followed by cooler summers.
The bacteria that causes plague, Yersinia pestis, cycles naturally through rodents and the fleas they carry, in western states, Mead said. U.S. outbreaks of the disease occur most often in New Mexico, California, Arizona and Colorado. The first American epidemic happened in San Francisco between 1900 and 1904, and the disease was likely imported from Asia.
“Human plague is often preceded by an outbreak ... in which large numbers of susceptible rodents die,” Mead wrote. “When this happens, hungry infected fleas leave the dead rodents and seek blood from other hosts, including humans and domestic pets.”
Mead said the CDC tested more than 100 animals in 2015, of which 20 were found to have the plague. Last year the CDC tested eight animals and only one was positive.
“Historically, CDC tested hundreds of animals and fleas each year,” Mead said. “As state health laboratories, particularly in Arizona, California, Colorado and New Mexico, gained the ability to do their own testing, we’ve tested fewer samples.”
Trio Of Plague Forms
While there are three forms of the plague, which stem from the organ infected by Y. pestis bacteria, the most common is a lymph node infection known as the Bubonic plague. Bubonic infections make up about 80 percent of cases, followed by the septicemic (blood) plague. Most instances can be treated by antibiotics.
The pneumonic plague is the most dangerous of the three, with a 90 percent fatality rate. This form develops in the lungs, often because those who contract the disease wait too long to receive treatment or are not prescribed the correct antibiotics, according to New Mexico Public Health Veterinarian Dr. Paul Ettestad.
Ettestad said despite the dangers and a history of the plague dating back to the 1940s in the state, there is only a 7 percent fatality rate among humans who contract the disease in New Mexico. Those who get sick often contract the disease through their pets. They tend to live in semi-rural areas between the cities of Albuquerque and Santa Fe.
If there are dead rodents with fleas on them, "they make their living by getting a blood meal,” he said. “A lot of these dogs or cats, they let them inside the house, they sleep in bed with people. It really looks like that’s when it happens.”
States Focus On Prevention, Control
The plague has “found a home here in the four corners” region of the country, Ettestad said. He noted that the state is largely focusing its efforts to combat the disease on prevention methods such as flea control for pets.
The plague has also found a home in California, which saw a rise in human cases in 2015. Dr. Vicki Kramer, chief of vector-borne diseases for the California Department of Health, said that her agency has worked closely with federal partners and others to study the number of animals infected by the plague.
The department has collected blood samples from various dead rodents to look for signs of the plague and used flea control practices in portions of the Sierra Nevada Mountains where there was “high plague activity.” In some cases, the department has treated rodents and their burrows for the disease with insecticides. Filtered paper strips are used to test for the presence of the plague in fleas and sent to a laboratory.
“Most people, if they get a plague infection, will be in a Bubonic form,” Kramer said. “Sometimes it can progress to the septicemic form.”
Modern Medicine Reduces Deaths
Symptoms of the plague include fever, nausea and swollen lymph nodes and can be treated with antibiotics if discovered early enough. Symptoms usually take about two weeks or less to kick in, officials said.
The mortality rate for untreated plague once ranged from 66 percent to 93 percent. It has been scaled back to 16 percent due to the arrival of more effective antibiotics, according to the CDC.
      
      