In Michigan, a school official's letter has started another fight over a flag.
This time, it's not the Confederate flag, which was flown by a group of southern states that broke away from the United States. They separated from the North to protect their right to own black people as slaves. The Confederate flag was their symbol. Today, it is a flag that many people dislike.
Instead, the fight in Michigan is over the original "Betsy Ross" flag. This flag was created in 1777, not long after the Declaration of Independence. The flag has 13 stars on a blue background, and 13 red and white stripes. They stand for the 13 original colonies, which became the United States.
But in Michigan, the problem with the flag is not its origin.
"Exclusion And Hate"
The problem is whether the flag should now be considered a symbol of "exclusion and hate." It was flown during the early years of the United States, when many people had slaves. The flag has also been adopted by some hate groups. These groups believe white people are more important than black people.
For Forest Hills School District official Dan Behm, that's a concern. He thinks the flag is so insulting "to some" people that it has no place at a high-school football game.
The trouble began last weekend when Forest Hills High School played a game against Ottawa High School in Grand Rapids, Michigan. Most of the students at Forest Hills are white. At Ottawa High School, most of the students are black.
Racist Ideas And Presidential Candidate
The Forest Hills students were not only parading around with the first flag. Some of them were also carrying a banner supporting Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump.
This display hurt the feelings of many people, including white parent Matthew Patulski. In a letter on his Facebook page, he said that Trump is known for his support of "racist" ideas. He also said that the "Betsy Ross" flag is a symbol of racism and hate.
By Tuesday, Forest Hills' Behm had apologized in a public letter. He said that flying the flag was "inappropriate." For some people it "symbolizes exclusion and hate," he wrote.
However, no one was punished for the incident.
Right To Free Speech
Some people were happy to read Behm's letter, while others were angered by it.
"All students across the country have the right to free speech," one person wrote online. They asked whether the school band would be "allowed to play the national anthem? Can't hold a Trump sign? What's next?"
Grand Rapids school official Teresa Weatherall Neal thanked Behm for his letter.
"I cannot deny the hurt...and outrage that I and so many others in this community felt about these actions that took place in our backyard," she said. "This type of behavior should not and will not be tolerated."
Briana Urena-Ravelo is an activist who lives in Grand Rapids. She is part of the Black Lives Matter movement. People in this movement believe that some police and courts treat black people unfairly. They are very concerned about racism in the United States.
"What were the conditions for people of color when that flag was created?" Urena-Ravelo asked. "I was property. Other people were getting their land stolen."
The incident in Michigan raises questions about the future of America's first flag. For some, it is a symbol of pride and patriotism. It is still regularly flown on Flag Day, and on other occasions. 
But the flag is also flown by groups that support racism and hate. Some people believe it is a symbol of an ugly time in American history. Now that hate groups have used it, they believe it should be put away.
      
      