Scientists have never seen "Planet Nine." Some think this mystery planet really exists. They do not know for sure, though. Now, one team of scientists has found another sign that Planet Nine is out there. 
Scientists say the planet is on the edge of the solar system. It is an enormous planet. They think it weighs five to 10 times as much as Earth. 
Planet Nine is so big, it could be affecting the rest of the solar system. Scientists say it makes the solar system wobble.
Konstantin Batygin and Mike Brown teach at the California Institute of Technology. They found the first signs of Planet Nine earlier this year. They worked with another scientist, Elizabeth Bailey, on a new study. It explains how Planet Nine might make the solar system wobble and tilt.
Planet Nine Has Strong Gravity
Bailey led the study. She said the wobble is caused partly because Planet Nine is so big. It has incredibly strong gravity. Gravity is a force that pulls things together. 
Scientists can't see Planet Nine. Instead, they look for clues in other places. They look for ways it could be affecting the solar system. 
For example, sometimes there are strange movements in our solar system. Planets don't move how they are expected to. These strange events could be caused by the gravity of a huge planet. Scientists used the same thinking many years ago. It led them to discover the planet Neptune. 
The newest evidence for Planet Nine has to do with how the other planets circle the sun. They all move around the sun on the same level. It's like they're all skating on the same flat ice rink. The sun is at the center. Compared to the sun, the rink has a tilt. It doesn't sit flat around the middle of the sun.
Sun And Planets Not On The Same Level
The tilt does not make sense to scientists. Based on how the solar system formed, the sun and planets should be on the same level. This is a big mystery.
Planet Nine might explain the tilt. It has a strange orbit. It is extremely large, and it is far from the sun. The scientists think these three things throw the rest of the solar system off balance.
That doesn't make it easier to find Planet Nine, though. That is the next important step for scientists. This won't be easy. The planet's orbit is very big. It orbits very far from Earth. 
The scientists are using strong telescopes to find it. Still, it could take a very long time to see Planet Nine.
      
      