On Sunday, a young man walked into a pizza shop in Washington, D.C. He was carrying a large gun. He fired at least one shot before surrendering to police officers. No one was hurt.
The man said he was there because of a story he read online. The story said there was a secret group hurting children. The pizza shop was also involved, the story said.
It was not true. The story was an example of fake news.
Fake News Spreads Quickly On The Internet
Sometimes people share untrue stories online. As the stories spread, more people read them. Some people think fake news changed how people voted in the election. Most fake news helped Donald Trump. It hurt Hillary Clinton, who ran against him.
Filippo Menczer is a computer scientist. He said fake news started to spread across the internet around 2010.
At that time, he found several websites with completely fake news. The stories contained untrue information. They were written to change people's minds.
In 2014, Problem Grew Larger Because Of A Deadly Disease
The problem got worse in 2014. That year a deadly disease spread across West Africa. One website said that a family in Texas was sick with the disease. The story was not true. But it was shared many times online. The website got money from all the people clicking on the story.
Dannagal Young is a scientist. She does not blame people for spreading fake news. They cannot help it, she says.
Young studies how people react to satire. Satire is a common form of fake news. Satire is fake news that is meant to be a joke. It is often used to make fun of lawmakers. The reader is supposed to get the joke.
Satire Makes Brains More Active
The brain works differently when it sees satire, Young said. It becomes more active. People are more likely to remember something that makes them laugh. That is why they remember fake news.
So, what happens next in the wild world of fake news? Some people think computers can help. For example, scientists can write programs to tell when something is satire.
But these programs cannot do everything. They cannot always tell when a story is not true. The programs are smarter than people, but not by much.
Young said there should be people in charge to help. For example, experts could choose the trending news on Facebook. They could also stop fake news from spreading.
      
      