Captain James Cook was a famous British explorer. In 1778, he tried to find the Northwest Passage. It is a water passage in the ocean. Above North America, it connects the Atlantic Ocean with the Pacific Ocean. 
No Shortcut: Too Much Ice
Cook hoped the passage would be a shortcut between the East and the West. It could open up trade. It could make it easier for Asia to trade with Europe.
Cook's boat could not travel that far north. He found huge walls of ice in his way.
Cook failed to find the Northwest Passage. Still, he did not totally fail, scientists say. Scientists are still studying what he said about ice. 
Ice Is Melting
Much of the ice has melted now. Recently, a cruise ship sailed through the Northwest Passage. Tourists were on board. They ate delicious meals. They soaked in hot tubs. They did not run into any walls of ice. The ship was called the Crystal Serenity.
Scientists say the ice is melting faster. The Earth is warmer, they say. Scientists think that it is because of the fuel that people use. People burn these fuels to make energy. Gasoline is burned to run cars. Coal or natural gas are burned to make electricity. Electricity runs televisions, electric lights, computers and many other things.
Burning the fuels create greenhouse gases. The gases become trapped in the air above. They store heat, making the world hotter. Scientists call this global warming.
Studying Cook's Records
Harry Stern is a math expert. He has studied Cook's journals and maps. 
Stern's studies show how the ice has gotten smaller since Cook.
Earlier explorers had ventured into Alaska. However, Cook was the first to map the ice edge, Stern said.
After Cook's visit, the ice has changed. Every summer, a large block of ice could be found in the same spot. Now the ice edge is hundreds of miles further north.
Greenhouse Gases Warming The Arctic
This connects with what we know today, Overland said. The Arctic ice pack has been shrinking for 30 years. The summer ice is now about a third of what it was in the 1980s. 
Temperatures here have changed too. They have increased more than twice as fast as the rest of the planet. This warming is mostly because of more greenhouse gases.
More ice has melted near the Northwest Passage. 
This has interested many countries and companies. If ice melts near the North Pole, they can drill for oil. They want to make money from the land.
Captain Cook's Discoveries
Cook’s study of the ice has interested historians.
David Nicandri is finishing a book on Cook. Nicandri says that Cook was the first polar scientist. Polar scientists study the North and South Poles.
Many people believed that oceans couldn’t freeze. Cook proved them wrong. Many people thought that sea ice originated in rivers. He proved that wrong, too.
      
      