BOSTON, Mass. — Have you ever wanted to know exactly what Tom Brady sees when he looks around the football field? Or, what he sees when he brushes his teeth in the morning?
This year's Super Bowl could give you those answers. You'll just have to turn on your TV. It's possible thanks to a 360-degree replay technology called "Be the Player."
Fox TV broadcasters will be able to show a play from almost any spot in the stadium. And, they can do this within minutes of the action taking place.
The freeD System
This spin around and zoom is called the "freeD" system. It has been used at other sporting events. But, this will be the first time the technology will show things from the athlete's view.
"It's something that most of us have never been able to see before," said Zac Fields, who works at Fox Sports Group.
The Intel technology company is rolling out "Be the Player" at this year's Super Bowl.
Tom Brady To Promote Tech
It will be promoted in an ad with Brady before that. It shows the famous quarterback in his everyday life. When Brady eats a pancake, the camera spins around and shows the crumbs falling from his mouth.
And, if New England makes it to the February 5 Super Bowl in Houston, there will be even more chances to see things from Brady's view.
"It's something that fans have always dreamed about: 'What did Tom see when he threw that pass?'" said Jeff Hopper, who works at the Intel Sports Group. "Everyone wants to be the player, to see what it's like to see it from that point of view."
38 Cameras In The Stadium
Intel has installed 38 cameras inside Houston's NRG Stadium. They will capture everything on the field. The cameras are connected by five miles of fiber optic cables to a special control room. There, producers from Intel and Fox Sports can pick out replays from the game and use them on TV.
It will take about two minutes to produce the clips. So, it's not yet ready for instant replay. But, it could show a new view of a touchdown by the time the teams are done with the extra point or kickoff. Hopper said there could be up to 20 "Be the Player" replays.
Right now, use of the system is limited to big events. It took about a month to equip the stadium in Houston. But, Hopper said, new stadiums are already being built with the cameras in mind.
Everyone Sees It As The Future
"Anyone who's building a new stadium now is saying, 'What do we need to do to make it freeD ready?'" he said. "Because everyone sees it as the future."
Teams and leagues hope to eventually use the information to improve their athletes' skills. Coaches will be able to use the video to see what their players saw. This will be better than relying on videos of the field taken from up high.
The technology would also help replay reviews. It would give officials the ability to freeze the action. Then, they could zoom in at any angle. They would see whether a player's knee was down before the ball popped out, for example.
"We're working with pretty much the entire sports world," Hopper said. "All the leagues, all the teams."
And Hopper thinks, in the future, there will be a sports world where fans will feel like they are a part of the game.
"Ultimately you'll be able to be on the field, with the players — the best players in the world," Hooper said. "Whatever sport that is, whether it be soccer, football or cricket, whatever. You'll be able to be part of the action."
      
      