We know the Earth is warming. We also know it is caused by humans. The Earth is warming because of greenhouse gases. These gases are released when we burn natural fuels, like gasoline and wood. 
Scientists have a pretty good idea about how warm Earth will be in the future. We know what some of the effects of global warming will be.
On the other hand, no one lives in the average climate. We live spread out north, west, east and south. We are on islands and large continents. We live both inland, or in coastal areas. Many of us want to know what’s going to happen to the weather where we live. How will my life be affected in the future?
Study Looked At Region In United States
Scientists from the University of Massachusetts at Amherst finished a study. They looked at weather in the U.S. Northeast. They found that this area will warm much faster than the world as a whole. In fact, it will warm faster than any other United States region. 
They expect the Northeast will warm 1.5 times faster than other areas. The United States will warm by 2 degrees Celsius. The United States will reach this temperature 10 to 20 years faster than the world as a whole.
So why does this matter? Well first, we will experience different impacts in different places. Temperatures change our environments, but in different ways. 
Warmer Air Also Leads To Heavier Rainfall
For instance, we know that warmer air leads to heavier rain and snow. The United States is already getting more rainfall than ever, especially in the Northeast. 
Based on this new study, it will only get worse. It means that winters in this region will get warmer and wetter. Instead of snow in winter, we will likely get rain. 
This affects the availability of water. In the spring months, the snow on mountains melts. In the spring, many places depend on this snow melt for water.
It also means that summers will have more intense heat. This will lead to more severe droughts—some areas won't get rain for long periods.
Slight Temperature Increase Can Cause Big Problems
Scientists worry about the Earth’s temperature increasing by 2 degrees Celsius. They say that warming any more than 2 degrees Celsius will cause big problems. 
This 2-degree target is somewhat based on science. But, there’s nothing magic about this number. 
The "2 degrees Celsius" number is really just a guess. Some people say we can't reach that number. Some say it needs to be lower.
Now, this temperature target may not matter. This study shows something new: even if we do keep the globe as a whole to a 2 degree Celsius temperature increase, some regions, like the Northeast United States, will still have higher temperatures. So, what is “safe” for the world is unsafe for certain regions.
"Global Warming" Affects Us All
What is “safe” or “unsafe” depends on where we live. People near the ocean are concerned about hurricanes. People in the Midwest worry about tornadoes. Some people are more concerned about floods. These events have different causes. Some causes are global. Some are local. 
This latest study provides proof: we need to keep in mind both the global and the regional effects of "global warming." We need to think about which effects we care about most. We need to think about how the global and regional temperature changes will cause those effects. 
We might lower our global emissions of greenhouse gases. This will keep our global temperature changes small. But even if we do that, there still could be large effects in our own neighborhoods.
      
      