In the distant past, Mars had water and maybe even a giant ocean. A group of scientists say they can prove this because of signs that two huge tsunamis might have happened on Mars. The tsunami waves might have been caused by asteroids or comets hitting the planet. The scientists wrote about their findings in a magazine for scientists. 
Today, Mars looks dry and dead. A long time ago, it may have looked like Earth. Mars used to have a thick atmosphere and large bodies of water. Some scientists believe Mars had a huge ocean, but not everyone agrees. 
The reason some scientists disagree is no shoreline can be found for this possible ocean. On Earth, oceans have shores that people can walk along for a long time. A shoreline is always at the same height. People call this height sea level. If all the water disappeared from the Atlantic Ocean, people could still find the Atlantic shoreline.  
Oceans Without Shorelines
People looked for shorelines on Mars that run along sea level, said J. Alexis P. Rodriguez. He studies Mars and worked on the paper. Scientists couldn't find a shoreline on Mars, and that was confusing, said Rodriguez. “Why do we have an ocean but we have no constant shoreline around the ocean?” 
Rodriguez chose to look at the problem in a different way. Instead of looking for shorelines, Rodriguez decided to look for signs of tsunamis. If there were tsunamis, then they had to come from an ocean. He found signs of tsunamis in northern Mars. 
The signs were piles of boulders and other materials that were shaped like lobes. Lobes look like teardrops. They have rounded bottoms that come to points. Water forms these lobes by pushing rocks around. Gravity pulls water from high to low. Usually, the tip of the lobes point down toward the water. The lobes on Mars pointed up, against gravity’s pull.
Beside tsunamis, not many other things form these lobes on land, said Virginia Gulick. She is a scientist who worked on the paper.  
Two Tsunamis Hit Northern Mars
The scientists built a map of northern Mars so they could study how these lobes came to be. They found that two huge tsunamis raged through the area. The first washed over an area of about 300,000 square miles. That's about the size of Pakistan. The second tsunami swamped an area of roughly 390,000 square miles, which is about the size of Egypt. 
The height of the wave probably reached 400 feet. That’s far taller than the 130-foot high wave that hit Japan after the 2011 earthquake. 
What could have caused such big waves? The scientists think asteroids or comets smashed into the planet. They left craters and triggered these mountains of water. The force of the hit would leave a crater at least 18 miles wide. The scientists said they found about 23 craters like that in this part of Mars.
Earth Had Same Experience
Of course, it’s just a theory right now because scientists can’t match the craters to the tsunamis. The theory makes sense because the same thing has happened on Earth. The asteroid that killed the dinosaurs 66 million years ago launched a giant tsunami as well.
The findings also explain why scientists can’t seem to find shorelines. The tsunamis totally buried the shorelines. 
It's really exciting to see the same types of events on Mars that happen on Earth, said Lisa Ely. She is a geologist who studies tsunamis on Earth. She was not involved in the paper. Ely said there’s no reason to think Earth is the only lively planet out there.
      
      