CHARLOTTE, N.C. — Basketball star Jeremy Lin wasn't on the court on Tuesday. He was at South Charlotte Middle School, congratulating students for taking part in his reading challenge.
He spoke to the students about the value of education. He also talked about how to prevent school bullying.
But some fans think Lin himself has been getting picked on. They believe the National Basketball Association (NBA) has been unfair to the Charlotte Hornets player. The group is supposed to act fairly, by setting sport rules and making sure they are followed.
Video Shows Several Fouls
A YouTube video posted last Tuesday shows several hard hits Lin received while trying to score points. A foul occurs when someone breaks the rules, usually by hitting another player. The hits in the video either were not called fouls or were simply called a soft foul.
The video has been viewed thousands of times. It shows the fouls that weren't called alongside other, softer fouls that were called hard fouls. A hard foul is more serious than a soft foul. It occurs when one player injures another.
Lin said he's not sure if the fouls have always been called this way.
“I don’t know," he told a newspaper. "I just know this is my experience. When you’re in the heat of the game, how it looks isn’t always how it feels.”
Lin saw the video over the weekend after several of his friends texted him a link to it. He admits he was surprised to see just how hard some of the fouls were.
“It is what it is. I just want to keep playing hard,” Lin said. “It’s one of those things where I made a rule of myself halfway through the season that I’m not going to argue with refs. Whatever happens with the video or whoever sees it or whatever changes happen, that’s beyond my control."
Lin Laughs At Fouls
Two of the worst fouls in the video made Lin laugh. The first came in a game against the Los Angeles Lakers. He was dribbling the ball past his old teammate Kobe Bryant.
Lin looked like he was about to make a pass to his teammate, Nic Batum. Instead, he was knocked to the ground by Bryant's outstretched arm, which caught him across the throat in midair. The ref called Bryant's move a soft foul.
Bryant seemed surprised he was called for a foul at all. But, given the forceful way he struck Lin, he could have been called for a hard foul.
“But that one,” Lin smiled, “I will say he did get the ball first, too.”
In January, Lin received another blow from an NBA star. New York Knicks forward Carmelo Anthony appeared to knock Lin in the face while Lin was trying to score a basket. Anthony wasn’t called for a foul at all. Instead, Arron Afflalo was charged with a soft foul after touching Lin. “I thought Afflalo fouled me,” Lin said. Only after seeing the video did he realize that it was actually Anthony.
Some on the Internet have charged that referees are not making these calls in Lin’s favor because he’s Asian. Lin has not publicly addressed that claim.
An NBA spokesman said that all of the fouls in the video were eventually reviewed. None was deemed a hard foul.
More Fouls For Lin
Still, it's possible that the league told game officials to pay more attention to Lin. At Monday's match between Lin's team and the Boston Celtics, the refs called more fouls on Lin than they usually do. This gave him the chance to shoot 10 free throws.
Lin made all 10 shots from the line and scored 25 points, a game record.
“Maybe they did,” Lin laughed when asked if the league saw the video. “You never know. Some of these things, you never know how it happens.”
      
      