BALTIMORE, Md. — Flying drones could one day carry life-or-death health supplies between hospitals. A team at Johns Hopkins Medicine learned how to keep blood and medicine safe during the flights.
Drones are also called unmanned aerial vehicles. They are flown by remote control. There is no pilot on a drone. 
Interest in the use of drones has grown lately. Companies are exploring using them for delivery. Drones can fly above traffic, through bad weather and into hard-to-reach areas.
Keeping Cool
At Johns Hopkins, a team studied how to keep blood cool on a drone. The blood needed to stay at a steady temperature.
“If the blood somehow was changed or destroyed in transport, then none of it matters,” said Dr. Timothy Amukele. He works at the Hopkins Bayview Medical Center. He spent 18 months on a team perfecting refrigeration on drones.
Amukele published findings in a magazine in November. They showed no biological change to blood packed in refrigerated coolers during test flights. The drone flights lasted about 26 minutes and covered 12 miles. They flew 328 feet above ground. 
Amukele hopes to begin sending drones between the Bayview center and Johns Hopkins Hospital. The two places are less than three miles apart. He still needs an OK from neighbors who might hear buzzing overhead. He also needs permission from the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), which recently made rules about drones.
Other Baltimore-area hospitals and more distant ones could be included. Drones would let them share medicine and blood products. Amukele thinks eventually emergency workers could ask for blood at the scene of accidents and natural disasters.  
It's All About Timing
Drones may become a realistic choice, said Ian Weston. He is the leader of the American Trauma Society. It is a group for those who treat trauma, which is when people are seriously injured.
Fast deliveries by drones would save lives, Weston said. It would help when patients can’t be taken quickly to a hospital, he said.
He said most trauma patients can get to a hospital within 60 minutes. With serious injuries, timing can be the difference between life or death. 
"More Use Could Bring Concerns"
Communities likely would support use of drones for health supplies, Weston said. He noted they have been fine with helicopters to help patients. Drones with cameras already are used to view large fires and accident scenes, he said. However, more use could bring concerns, as in other countries where drones have been used to keep an eye on people.
Questions remain about drone abilities and what the FAA would allow. The agency does not allow drones over 55 pounds. It does not let them fly faster than 100 miles an hour or higher than 400 feet. The pilots operating them remotely must be certified.
Solving the refrigeration problem makes drone use possible, Weston said. However, he and others said that more tests are needed. They need to show if drones are better than other ways of delivery.
Better Than Driving?
Dr. Thomas M. Scalea works at the Maryland Shock Trauma Center. He said the Hopkins study answered a big question. It addressed “if we could do it, but now we have to ask if we should do it,” he said.
Drones might not be worth using yet if they crash, don’t help patients or cost too much. Scalea said he’d like to see if drones could help hospitals share materials. However, he warned officials to avoid the urge to run with the new technology.
Scalea said it should be compared to driving. If it is quicker than going on the roads and as cheap as driving, "then you’ve got something. We’re a little ways away from that," he said. 
There might not be much need for blood at accident scenes, said Scalea and Dr. Peter P. Taillac, an emergency medicine specialist. They said it’s still most important to get patients to the hospital.
Taillac sees other uses for drones. They could be used to deliver rarely used drugs, such as one for rattlesnake bites.
      
      