ENGLEWOOD, Colo. — Peyton Manning's football days are over.
The Denver Broncos quarterback has retired from the National Football League. Manning played for 18 seasons. He set dozens of records. He won five Most Valuable Player awards. Manning also won two Super Bowl championships. 
Phillip Fulmer coached Manning in college. Fulmer called it "almost magical" that Manning did so well in Denver. Manning led Denver to a record of 50-15 in his four years there. That is not all. Manning helped the Broncos win the Super Bowl just one month ago.
John Elway is the Broncos' general manager. He runs the team. Elway said, "Peyton was a player that guys wanted to play with." He explained, "That made us better as a team."
He Won A Super Bowl With Two Teams
Elway got along well with Manning. Elway was "thrilled that we were able to win a championship in his final year."
Manning leaves the NFL as its career passing leader. He won more games than any other quarterback. Manning is the only quarterback to win a Super Bowl with two different teams.
Manning's first team was the Indianapolis Colts. The Colts drafted him in 1998. Manning won the Super Bowl with the Colts in 2007. However, the Colts later gave up on Manning. Manning missed the entire 2011 season after he hurt his neck. He never played for the Colts again.
In 2012, Manning signed with the Denver Broncos. His neck was not a problem. He played very well. Manning even set a new record for touchdown passes in one year. He threw 55 touchdowns in 2013.
Last Season Was His Hardest One
"I get asked a lot about my legacy," Manning said before this year's Super Bowl. Manning said that he wants to be remembered as a good teammate. He talked about how having the respect of his teammates is important to him.
Manning also said, "I just love football."
For the man who wore jersey No. 18, his 18th season was also his hardest.
Manning hurt his foot before the 2015 season started. It bothered him all year. He did not always throw the ball well. Manning even had to miss six weeks of the season. He had to rest his foot.
Even though he was hurt, Manning's career still had a happy ending like a fairy tale. His Broncos beat the Carolina Panthers in the Super Bowl. Manning was able to retire as a champion.
      
      