RICHMOND, Virginia — Terry McAuliffe is the governor of Virginia. McAuliffe just gave 13,000 ex-criminals back their right to vote. When a person goes to jail for a serious crime they lose the right to vote. The governor thinks this is wrong. He thinks that they should get the right to vote back after they are out of jail.
Some other lawmakers are not happy about it. They think he is doing it for selfish reasons. McAuliffe is a Democrat. Many of the ex-criminals he wants to let vote would vote for Democrats. Democrats are a part of one of the two main political groups in the United States. The other group is the Republicans. McAuliffe tried giving the right to vote back to ex-criminals, but the Republican lawmakers stopped it.
Ex-Criminals Should Be Able To Vote
McAuliffe was upset at the lawmakers for stopping him. He says they are ignoring the law of the United States. He thinks they are not letting people have a say. They should be able to vote. McAuliffe thinks letting ex-criminals vote is good for their families and neighbors.
McAuliffe says these people have jobs. They have kids and grandchildren in school. McAuliffe said he cannot let them be treated badly for the rest of their lives. 
McAuliffe thinks the lawmakers are being unfair. He says that taking away voting rights affects African-Americans more than white people. He says the South has issues with treating black people unfairly. It has a history of racism.
The lawmakers say they are doing their job. Their job is to watch over the laws. They are supposed to make sure the governor does not get too much power. He made the order without asking other lawmakers. They want to be sure he follows all the rules.
Letters Giving Them Back Their Right
Many ex-criminals signed up to vote. Then their rights were taken away after the court decision. They are now getting letters from the governor. The letters say that they get the right to vote back. McAuliffe's office looked at each person's case one by one. That is what the lawmakers said he had to do.
McAuliffe will continue to give back voting rights to ex-criminals who meet the rules. He is giving back voting rights to those who ask for it first. 
Kenneth Williams lost his right to vote. He is waiting for his letter saying he can vote again. Williams is 67 years old. He spent 10 years in jail for robbery. Now he has a job helping prisoners. He is excited to vote. He also wants to help other ex-criminals get their right to vote.
      
      