MILWAUKEE — For Amy Schwabe and her daughter Alex, candy can be scary.
Alex is one of 15 million Americans who is allergic to a food. In her case, she must avoid eggs and peanuts. Even things like MandMs, which don't actually contain peanuts, can be dangerous. They are made in a factory that also uses peanuts, so they might have tiny bits of peanuts in them.
"We can never just go to a bakery or grab doughnuts," said Schwabe, who writes the Milwaukee Allergy Mom blog. "And going to a baseball game is terrifying."
Doctors expect 4.1 million children to develop a food allergy this year.
Nine out of 10 of them will be allergic to eight foods. These are milk, eggs, peanuts, tree nuts, soy, wheat, fish and shellfish.
Out Of Control Allergies
The federal Centers For Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) estimates that 8 out of 100 kids have food allergies. The numbers are rising and doctors do not know why.
There is no cure for food allergies. However, many new treatments are in the works. Allergies cost the United States about $25 billion each year in trips to the doctor and other things.
Food allergies happen when the body makes an antibody in response to a harmless bit of food. Antibodies identify and kill threats to the body. Usually, these are germs like bacteria and viruses.
The next time a person eats that food, the antibodies recognize it. Then the body releases chemicals that cause allergies.
Food allergies can cause a runny nose, bumps and itching. It can cause people to throw up. Severe allergies can make it hard to breathe and can be very dangerous.
Most scientific studies show that all food allergies are increasing, said Robert Wood. He is the director of allergy and immunology at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore. Wood said that allergies probably do not have a single cause.
What Is To Blame?
The increase in food allergies has been blamed on different things. Some scientists think there is a problem with the bacteria in people's digestive systems. Others say it is caused by a lack of Vitamin D or by processed foods.
There are other ideas, as well. One is that people are not dirty enough. Our food and environment are much cleaner than they used to be. However, the body's immune system continues to fight bacteria and viruses that are not there. So it reacts to food particles instead.
Another reason might be what kids eat. For many years, doctors told parents not to give little kids allergens, like peanuts. An allergen is something which causes an allergy.
A Study In Peanuts
A study called Learning Early About Peanut — or LEAP — showed the opposite. Eating peanuts might protect children against food allergies later. Likewise, avoiding peanuts may actually cause food allergies, said Gideon Lack. He was the lead scientist in the study.
Researchers are also exploring treatments that help the immune system become used to allergens. These treatments are called immunotherapy. Patients are given a small dose of an allergen, like peanuts. Different kinds of treatments give the allergen in  different ways. For example, a skin patch or under the tongue. The dose is gradually increased. Some studies have shown that eventually many children and adults can drink a glass of milk or eat a peanut butter cookie safely. However, some people have to stop the treatment because they become too sick.
Hope On The Horizon
These treatments provide hope for those who suffer from food allergies.
Mary Morris is the president of Allergy Associates of La Crosse, Wisconsin. Morris said she is very hopeful that doctors will be able to treat allergies in the next five to 10 years.
Wood agreed.
The future looks very bright for food allergies, he said.
      
      