Here we are again, with a huge flood upending lives for many Americans and making everybody wonder whether climate change is to blame.
In this case, it's the stunning, multiday flood in southern Louisiana caused by a storm that dumped more than 2 feet of rainfall over three days in some places. At least 11 people are dead and thousands have had to leave their homes.
Experts Explain That The Flood Was Not "Caused" By Climate Change
By Monday, climate researchers and weather experts explained had yet again that, no, this flood was not "caused" by climate change. However, they said, it is precisely the sort of weather event that you would expect to see more of on a warming planet.
"Climate change has already been shown to increase the amounts of rain falling in the most intense events across many parts of the world," Weather Underground meteorologists Bob Henson and Jeff Masters wrote. "Extreme rainfall events like this week's Louisiana storm are expected (to) grow increasingly common in the coming years."
"Climate Change Is ... Weighting The Dice Against Us"
"Louisiana is always at risk of floods, naturally, but climate change is exacerbating that risk, weighting the dice against us," said Katharine Hayhoe, a climate researcher at Texas Tech University. "How long will it be until we finally recognize that the dice are loaded?"
The easiest link between climate change and extreme weather involves heat waves, a recent study by the National Academy of Sciences found. This makes sense. A warming planet overall breaks warm temperature records more frequently than cold temperature records. It also sets the stage for longer or stronger bouts of extreme heat.
A Warmer Atmosphere Means More Rain And Snow
But one of the other relatively simple links involves rainfall and heavy flooding. "Heavy rainfall is influenced by a moister atmosphere," the National Academy report said. The wet atmosphere is a consequence of global warming caused by humans, though not as direct as the increase in temperature itself.
This is because as the atmosphere warms, its ability to retain water vapor increases. Thus, extreme weather, from tropical cyclones to blizzards, will be able to produce more rain or snow than before.
Indeed, when it comes to this kind of heavy precipitation, the trend has already been documented in the United States, according to the National Climate Assessment.
What this means is that we are likely to see this kind of flooding in the future. It does not, however, mean that the flooding was "caused" by climate change.
To be sure, researchers could try to prove a link between the Louisiana flooding and climate change. To do so, they could perform what is called an "attribution study," which determines whether a flood like this one is more likely to occur in a world full of human greenhouse gas emissions than in one without it. So far, there is no such study -- but there could be soon as these types of studies are growing increasingly common.
That still would not prove that the flooding was caused by climate change. Rather, it would likely show that climate change is shifting the odds in favor of such flooding.
A Different Way To Think About Extreme Weather And Climate Change
But not all researchers are convinced that this is the only way to tackle this problem.
Climate scientist Kevin Trenberth of the National Center for Atmospheric Research has argued that we should think about it a different way. Now, people want to prove a link to climate change. Instead, he says, they should simply assume there's a link between climate change and extreme weather driven by thermodynamic factors, like heat waves and major rainstorms.
"Global Warming Is Real And Present"
"Because global warming is real and present, it is not a question as to whether it is playing a role, but what that role is," Trenberth and two colleagues wrote.
In the meantime, though, most scientists continue to talk about an increase in a particular type of weather and the changing odds that it will happen. This means just as much for our society.
"Not Just A Wrong Answer, But A Potentially Dangerous One"
"We design our infrastructure and plan our society looking backward, assuming that the past is a reliable predictor for the future. And looking backward does keep us safe, when climate is relatively stable, as it has been over much of the history of human civilization on this planet," Hayhoe said.
"When climate is changing, though, relying on the past to predict the future will give us the wrong answer -- and not just a wrong answer, but a potentially dangerous one," she said. "We buy a house outside the 100-year flood zone, believing that means we're safe; we expect our storm sewer drains and our levees to protect us from all but the rarest extremes."
We fail to to take into account the fact that these extremes are occurring much more frequently in a changing climate, she said.
      
      