When Ntuthuko Shezi looks out of his office windows, he sees tall, shiny buildings. He is working in the new business district in Johannesburg, in the country of South Africa. The country of about 49 million people is on the bottom of the continent of Africa. It borders two oceans: the south Atlantic and the Indian.
Shezi might work in the city, but he is thinking about a farm that is 250 miles away. The farm is out in the country, in an area called KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa.
Shezi created Livestock Wealth. It is a new South African company that uses the internet to help rich people in the country’s cities. Using a computer, they can buy cattle, a traditional business activity in South Africa.
An Idea Rooted In Family Business
Shezi says, “It was very rural where I grew up. I fetched water from a river. My grandparents owned a couple of cows." He says that cows were an important way that his family made money, and that gave him an idea.
His idea came from the fact that it is hard for one person to earn money from cattle. To make money from cattle, a person needs a farm, skills and enough money to begin. It is also important to know where to send the animal to be butchered and where to sell the meat. However, there are many South Africans who remember how their parents or grandparents owned cows. They want to own cows too. Shezi thinks that he has found a way to help them do that and says, “I’m calling it 'crowd-farming.'”  
Last year Shezi launched his company with a herd of 800 cows. He has 6,178 acres of farmland. People in South Africa, Europe, and the United States have already bought 1 in 10 of the cows. A person buys a cow for about $728. Then they pay $16 a month for a farmer to take care of it.
Digital Experience Of Farming
The cows that are sold usually produce one calf each year. The calves are sold for meat when they are 7 months old. The owner of the cow and calf usually makes money on the animals after two years. The older cows live for about eight years and then are sold for meat.
Shezi also tries to give the customer the experience of farming. With the website and Livestock Wealth app, customers can watch their cows remotely. Pictures and information can be shared on social media. People get new information on their cows at least once a month. Shezi says, “The market is people who understand the value and pride of owning cattle." He says the company sends texts and email, and updates its website daily. Owners can learn about where and how much the cow is grazing, how much rain the farm is getting, how the cow is feeling and how the calf is doing.
Poor Land Feeds Half The Country's Cattle
There are 13 million head of cattle in South Africa. Half live on poor land. They are managed in small herds by people who are poor. The rest are found on business farms, which often have the best pastures for two reasons. The first is the colonial land grabs, where other countries took control of African land beginning in the late 1800s. The second is the old apartheid system in South Africa, where black people and others did not have the same rights as white people and were forced to live separately.  
Across Africa, owning cattle has traditionally been a measure of wealth and power. For millions of people, cattle are still the most valuable possession. Around the world, the market for meat has been guided by stronger need from China and other countries. South Africans are also eating more beef, Shezi says
“I was thinking, ‘What is a simple, easy way to grow my own money?’ My thinking always came back to the cow,” Shezi says.
      
      