In 2014, the "Ice Bucket Challenge" hit the Internet. People all over the country dumped ice water on their heads. They promised to give money to help cure a terrible disease. Then, they challenged other people to do it also.
The Ice Bucket Challenge is working, said the ALS Foundation. It is the main charity getting money from the challenge.
Scientists have found a new clue into ALS.
The Cold Facts
The stunt raised millions for ALS. It stands for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. It is also known as Lou Gehrig's Disease. ALS makes it hard to move. There is no cure for the disease.
The ALS Foundation received $115 million from the challenge. It gave $1 million to a large project called MinE. It is trying to find a cure for ALS. Scientists from all over the world work on the MinE project. The ALS Foundation said they found a new gene involved in ALS. They are calling it NEK1.
Genes are the basic building blocks of life. They tell your body how to grow and work. Genes are passed from parents to their children.
ALS is very rare. Sometimes, it can be passed down from parents. Most people do not get ALS that way, though. Just about one out of 10 cases are caused by genes. Genes are probably involved in many more cases, the ALS Foundation explains. These genes may be involved in a different way, though.
Donations Fund Lots Of Research
Last August, MinE scientists said the money had a big effect.
Philip Wong is a lead scientist in the study. He teaches at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore. He said the money helped them finish the study sooner.
The next step is to understand what NEK1 does. The scientists hope to use that information to find treatments for it.
Project MinE has a large goal. It will discover all the genes of at least 15,000 people with ALS. The scientists hope to find other genes involved in ALS.
"Cooperation Pays Off"
John Landers is with the University of Massachusetts. He was another one of the lead scientists. He said the challenge helped scientists around the world work together. Cooperation pays off, he said.
There is another question. Charities all over the country are talking about the challenge. They wonder if they can do something like it to raise money.
      
      