SAN JOSE, Calif. — Barred owls have speckled brown wings, teddy bear eyes and a hoot that sounds like a playful puppy. This one also has a red laser dot on its head. Lowell Diller aims, fires his rifle and the owl falls to the ground.
Diller has pulled the trigger on barred owls more than 100 times in the forests of Humboldt and Del Norte counties in California. He’s no poacher that hunts out of season or a law-breaking woodsman. He’s a wildlife biologist. 
This is all part of an experiment set up by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Diller kills one bird to protect another. The larger barred owl is moving into the habitat, or place, where the northern spotted owl naturally lives. The northern spotted owl could disappear and become extinct in the Pacific Northwest. 
Diller works for Green Diamond Resource Co., a lumber company that cuts down and plants trees. Diller knows which trees are home for the owls. The barred owls have invaded California from the eastern United States. The northern spotted owls are being pushed out, and the California spotted owl in the Sierra National Forest and Monterey could be next.
Pushing Out A Big Feathered Bully
A study being published in a wildlife journal shows that shooting some of the larger barred owls is saving the smaller spotted owls.
Conservationists who work to save animals say it is a war. Barred owls are fighting for nesting areas in the forests. The spotted owls are losing.
Sadly the big-eyed barred owls are also big bullies. They chase away other birds. These bullied birds hide and stay very quiet. They stop calling for mates. The number of new baby owls goes down. The number northern spotted owls is down about 12 percent.
“Can you imagine letting something like that go extinct?” Diller asked.
Focus On Saving Trees, Group Urges
Killing owls is upsetting for Andrea Jones of the National Audubon Society. They work to save birds. She says that people admire owls because they are found in our history and the stories we tell our children. She added, “Humans love things with big eyes.”
She wants to stop the shooting. She thinks cutting down old trees causes the war between the owls.
PETA is a group that protects animals. They think growing more trees for homes will solve the problem.
Northern spotted owls are curious. They come closer to people than other owls. Diller gives mice to the northern spotted owls. The males carry the mice back to nests to feed their mates. The owls return. They remember Diller and get friendly.
Testing His Theory In The Woods
Timberlands with northern spotted owls have plans to save the birds. Diller had noticed that spotted owls were declining when he met Jack Dumbacher. He's a bird expert from the California Academy of Sciences. Dumbacher had a permit to collect barred owls.
Diller realized he could get a permit from U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service too.  He would test whether barred owls were cutting down the number of spotted owls. If the experiment worked, he could use the results to help Green Diamond cut down some trees, save others and protect the owls.
In 2009, Diller got the permit. He set aside areas of timberland to remove barred owls. In other areas, he did nothing. After four years, he would see what happened.
Push To Save Owls Moves To Other Areas
Dumbacher and Diller went into the woods, first playing a spotted owl call. If a spotted owl appeared, they left. If not, they played a barred owl call. When it flew out, it was shot.
Diller’s study paid off. In the areas without barred owls, numbers of spotted owls went up. 
Green Diamond got more permits to continue removing barred owls. A company official said that it will save more spotted owls and only cut down a few trees in the area.
Now, the Fish and Wildlife Service has similar studies to save the spotted owl in Washington, Oregon and California.
      
      