BERLIN, Germany — Europe sent a space probe, or a spacecraft without astronauts on board, to Mars. But it was traveling too fast. It seems to have crashed into Mars. It ended up in a fiery ball of rocket fuel.
The probe is named the Schiaparelli lander. It was sent to Mars to collect information about the planet for the European Space Agency.
Pictures taken by a NASA satellite show a black spot in the area where Schiaparelli was meant to touch down. Before that, there had been two days of radio silence. The silence started less than a minute before Schiaparelli was supposed to land.
The European Space Agency thinks that Schiaparelli could have dropped from as high as two-and-a-half miles. This means its speed would have been more than 186 miles per hour. That is too fast for it to land safely on Mars.
The Mission Is Still Considered A Success
Schiaparelli was designed to test technology for another Mars landing in 2020. The European Space Agency said this spaceship without astronauts successfully went into orbit on Wednesday. The spacecraft will soon begin analyzing the atmosphere on Mars. Part of its job includes searching for evidence of life there.
"In my heart, of course I'm sad that we couldn't land softly on the surface of Mars," European Space Agency chief Jan Woerner said. He added that Schiaparelli gave  engineers a lot of information before the crash. That will prove valuable for Europe's next attempt to land on Mars. So, Woerner says the mission is still considered a success even though Schiaparelli crashed.
Europe's last mission to the surface of Mars wasn't successful either. It was named the Beagle 2. It landed on Mars in 2003. But, the spacecraft didn't work like it was supposed to.
There have been seven successful robotic landings on Mars. All of them have been spacecraft from NASA.
The last landing on Mars was in 2012. The Curiosity rover spacecraft touched down in one of the planet's craters. There are two spacecraft on Mars now. They are Curiosity and Opportunity, which landed in 2004.
Mars' Surface Makes It Hard To Land On
It is hard to land a spacecraft on the surface of Mars. The planet has a thin, dusty atmosphere. Also, these spacecraft are traveling very fast. They only have a few minutes to slow down and land.
Schiaparelli didn't have any big problems until the last minute of its landing. The pictures taken by NASA's orbiter shows things that weren't visible on the surface in older pictures. This is how scientists know something new is there.
The first picture is a big, bright spot, which is likely Schiaparelli's parachute, the European Space Agency said. The second is likely the lander. It was described as a large fuzzy dark patch that is a little more than half a mile away from the parachute.
Further Mars Exploration Is In The Works
Schiaparelli was able to send back information on Mars before the crash. Scientists won't get any of the close-up photos that it took while it was getting closer to the planet's surface. Those were meant to be transmitted after the landing. But, they couldn't be sent because of the crash.
The other part of the European Space Agency's Mars mission is called the Trace Gas Orbiter. It was working well and will collect information during two orbits in November, the agency said.
The spacecraft will descend next year to be closer to the surface of Mars. Then it will begin its study of the planet. The Trace Gas Orbiter is also going to act as a radio relay. This means it will help send information for the next stage of Europe's Mars mission and other future attempts to land on the planet.
      
      