In the 1300s, there was a disease called the Black Death. It was also called the bubonic plague. It killed millions of people across Europe. Exactly how many people died, though, remains a mystery. 
Carenza Lewis is trying to find out. She is an archaeologist studying the history of the plague. She looks for evidence of what happened by digging up layers of buried records. She just finished a study of buried pottery.
Digging Up Pottery
"Under every village, every community, there is a huge reservoir of archaeological evidence just sitting there," she said. "Evidence of these life-shattering events that people like us would have lived through - or not."
Lewis is looking for bits of broken pottery from around the time of the Black Death. Pottery can show how communities changed over time. For example, the amount of pottery from a certain time period can give archaeologists an idea of how many people were alive then. By studying pottery, Lewis wants to know how many people were affected by the Black Death. 
Based on the bits of pottery she found, Lewis estimated the number of people who were alive in England before and after the plague. She discovered that more than 4 out of 10 people were gone when the plague was over.
Pottery Confirms History
The evidence, she says, makes it clear just how great the loss was. The Black Death is famous for how many people it killed. Until the last 50 years or so, historians believed the stories. They accepted that the plague probably did kill a quarter to a half of Europe's inhabitants. They also believed it led to widespread social chaos. 
Solid evidence for that was hard to find, though. No mass graves were found. There were no population records. Some started to think that the Black Death may not have been as bad as many people thought.
Scientists generally believe that societies are able to heal themselves when outside forces threaten them. No disease in modern times has come close to killing as many people as the Black Death is supposed to have killed. Perhaps tales of the disease wiping out almost half of the population were a bit exaggerated? According to Lewis's new work, they were not.
Digging 2,000 Holes
With the help of community members, Lewis and her co-workers dug about 2,000 holes in the ground. The workers were supervised by archaeologists.
Lewis and her team uncovered about 10,000 shards of pottery. They came from 50 towns across eastern Britain. From the looks of the pottery, there were big population shifts in almost every one of those communities.
The pottery from pre-plague years was easy to spot and seemed to be everywhere. However, pottery from the next 200 years or so was harder to find. The drop is evidence that there were many fewer people alive in the towns after the plague.
Some Towns Were Hit Harder
The number of shards also differed from town to town. Lewis takes this as evidence that the plague really did kill up to half of the population. It probably hit some towns harder than others. There was more pottery found in towns where the disease was not as bad. Lewis says the pottery shows how different villages were affected differently.  
"For the first time we can measure this impact and map it to know exactly what the decline was and where it happened," Lewis said.
Bigger Towns Did Better
Villages that relied on farming were more affected by the disease. Because so many people were sick, there were few people left to take care of the fields. Bigger towns did better. Their main businesses did not need large numbers of people to thrive.
Lewis hopes to study the Black Death in other British towns. She hopes her work helps other scientists.
"Until we know what happened we can't understand why it happened," she said. "This is beginning to give us a clearer picture."
      
      