AMATRICE, Italy — A terrible earthquake struck parts of Italy on Wednesday. The ground shook without warning early in the morning. Buildings fell down, hurting people. Some people died. Whole towns were ruined.
On Thursday, rescuers dug through crumbled homes. They were hoping to find someone who was still alive.
Rescuers worked in teams. They dug through piles of rock and metal. The piles cover the spots where homes once stood. As they dug, the rescuers searched for signs of life.
So far, rescuers have found 241 dead bodies. They have also found a few lucky people who were still alive.
Rescuers Still Hope To Find More Survivors
One place rescuers searched was the Hotel Roma in the town of Amatrice.
Rescuers still hope to find more people who are alive. They will look until "the last person is found," said rescuer Lorenzo Botti. Rescuers must "make sure no one is trapped."
Three towns were badly hit by the earthquake. They are Amatrice, Accumoli and Pescara del Tronto. 
Most of the dead were in Amatrice. So far, 184 dead bodies have been found there. 
Tent cities have been set up by rescuers. They will house those who lost their homes. 
"It's not easy for them," said rescuer Tiziano De Carolis. "They have lost everything."
Rescue workers have weeks of work ahead of them. They say they will not give up.
Everyone Cheered When The Girl Was Pulled Out
Franco Mantovan is a firefighter. He said there are still people to be rescued in Pescara del Tronto. Rescuers spotted three people alive. They were under the rubble, or pieces of buildings. Unfortunately, the people were very hard to reach. Rescuers said they will keep trying, though.
Firemen in Pescara del Tronto rescued a 10-year-old girl Wednesday evening. They pulled her out from under a crumbled home.
One rescue worker found the girl. He spotted her after he heard faint noises. 
"You can hear something under here," the man said to the other rescuers. "Quiet, quiet."
Then, he began talking to the girl. "Come on, Giulia, come on, Giulia."
Everyone cheered when the girl was pulled out. She was still alive.
The ending was not so happy much of the time. 
The rescuers do not always get to save everyone.
"But some make it," said rescuer Christian Bianchetti. 'That's why we are here."
      
      