OAKLAND, Calif. — Stephen Curry has made history again, as the first unanimously chosen NBA MVP. Never before have all NBA sportswriters and broadcasters voted for the same player to win the prestigious first place rank. Curry earned the award for the second straight year on Tuesday after leading the Warriors to a record-setting season.
Curry Led Warriors To Record-Breaking Season
The NBA superstar is the 11th player in league history to be voted MVP two seasons in a row. He is the first guard to do so since Steve Nash in the 2004-05 and 2005-06 seasons. Curry received a total of 1,310 points from the 130 media voters from the U.S. and Canada.
Kawhi Leonard of San Antonio took second place in the vote and LeBron James of Cleveland took third. They were followed by Oklahoma City's Russell Westbrook and Kevin Durant, and Curry's teammate Draymond Green was seventh.
Curry is the first two-time winner in the history of the Golden State Warriors, and Wilt Chamberlain (1959-60) is the only other winner from the Warriors. After leading the Warriors to their first championship in 40 years, Curry and his team went on to a record-breaking season. The Chicago Bulls broke the record for the most regular-season victories in 1995-96 when they went 72-10. This season, the Warriors won 73 games.
In a stunning overtime performance Monday night in the playoffs, Curry showed he can take over a game in a matter of seconds. He returned from a sprained right knee to score 40 points, including 17 in overtime, in a 132-125 victory at Portland. The Warriors are up 3-1 in the Western Conference semifinals.
What Curry Did "Was Crazy"
Steve Kerr, who is coach of the Warriors, was voted NBA Coach of the Year last month. Kerr said he figured Curry would make a few shots at the end of the game, but what Curry did "was crazy."
Today, Curry is one of the most recognizable athletes in the entire world. He was presented with his MVP trophy Tuesday at Oracle Arena.
With his dazzling ball handling and amazing long-range shots, Curry has forced defenses to work harder. He made a record 402 3-pointers after no player had previously even hit 300 in a season. He averaged 30.1 points per game, the best in the NBA, along with 6.7 assists and 5.4 rebounds. He also led the NBA with 2.1 steals per game. He shot 50.4 percent from the field, 45.4 percent from 3-point range and 90.8 percent from the foul line.
From the start of the season, Curry vowed to take his game to another level, and he met that goal with enthusiasm. Now, all that matters to him is staying healthy and leading the Warriors to another title.
Kerr said Curry is as good as he is because he can score from anywhere, even beyond the 3-point line.
Curry understands how much more attention and pressure MVPs and players on championship teams get.
"They're going to have more of a spotlight, and people are going to ask questions about whoever it is," he said. "When there are legends and people that I looked up to as a player — as a young kid, as a basketball player — Hall of Famers and guys that talk about our team, it means that obviously we're doing something good so we keep doing it. I take it with a grain of salt."
      
      