Famous scientist Charles Darwin once wrote that insects have anger, terror, jealousy and love. That was in 1872. Today, scientists have discovered more proof of this. A study says that bumblebees may experience something like happiness.
Blue Flowers
You can't ask a bee to explain its own emotions. Scientists have to look at the insect's brain, actions and body.
Clint Perry is a biologist. He wanted to see if bumblebees have emotions. He trained bumblebees to tell the difference between two flowers. One was a blue flower. The other was a green flower. The bees found sugary water when they explored the blue flower. They found plain, unsweetened water when they explored the green one. The bees learned that the blue flower meant a tasty reward.
Sweetening Their Hopes
Then the scientists put blue-green flowers into the middle of the container. Half of the insects were given sugar. The other half were not. The bees with sugar flew faster toward the blue-green flower. 
Sugar put the bees into a good emotional state. They were more hopeful that the blue-green flowers would have sugar. It did not work with other colors though. They only had more hopes for a flower with some blue in it. This is how scientists knew it was not just a sugar rush.
Feelings Are Different
Sugar makes humans feel better, too. Newborn babies cry less if they've been given something sweet. A bit of candy also makes grownups feel better. 
Bees may have emotions. Feelings are different, though. Feelings and emotions mean something different to scientists. Emotions can be observed. For example, the speed of your breathing might drop if you hear bad news. Feelings are the experience of those actions. For example, hearing something bad might make you feel sad. Feelings are different for every person. For that reason, they are much harder to measure.
Insects Are Not Machines
Perry says he showed that bees may have emotions. He did not show that they have feelings. 
Discovering that insects have feelings could change the way we think about them. It could also change how we try to get rid of them.
Perry hopes this study will help people see insects differently. He wants people to know that they are more than just tiny, unthinking machines.
      
      