Colorful planets can be seen throughout the "Star Wars" universe. As it turns out, our universe is just as colorful.
Scientists have discovered more than 3,400 alien planets. They can use special computers to find their colors and light.
Some of planets in the latest “Star Wars” film, “Rogue One," might seem strange. But the real planets in our universe might be even stranger. 
A real planet reminded scientists a lot of Luke Skywalker’s home planet. They decided to name it “Tatooine.” 
Officially called Kepler-16b, the Saturn-sized planet is about 200 light-years away. It has two suns, just like Tatooine.
Planet With Two Suns Has A Double Sunset
This the first planet we've found where there is a double-sunset, said Laurance Doyle, a star scientist. His team discovered the planet using NASA’s Kepler space telescope in 2011.
A person on Kepler-16b would have two shadows. In a storm, two rainbows would appear. 
George Lucas, the creator of "Star Wars," likes desert planets. The ones he created in "Star Wars" have impressed NASA scientists.
“Desert planets are possible. We have one right here in our solar system in Mars," said Shawn Domagal-Goldman, a scientist at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center. 
Studies show humans could live on these planets, says Domagal-Goldman.
Desert worlds might even be very common, he said. They could be hot, like Tatooine and Jakku, or they could be cold, like Mars, and Jedha in “Rogue One."
Scientists found an icy super-Earth in 2006. It reminded scientists very much of a planet they had seen on screen: Hoth, the ice planet in "The Empire Strikes Back."
There Can Be Life Under The Ice
This real-life Hoth is too cold to support life as we know it. But life can still happen under the ice of a different world, or a moon in our solar system. On Earth, life has been found inside tough places. Creatures and plants can be found in deep ocean, or even the frozen soil of Antarctica.
NASA is starting a mission to look for life on Jupiter’s icy moon Europa. Saturn’s moon Enceladus also has an underground ocean that could have life.
For many astronomers, the most important planet to study is Earth. It's the only one that has life as we know it. 
By studying Earth's climate, we can understand the possible climates and life of other planets, said Nancy Kiang. She's a research scientist at NASA. 
Kiang studies the plant life that might exist on planets around other stars.
We aren't sure there are other worlds with oceans, like the beachy planet Scarif from “Rogue One.” But we have found frozen ocean worlds nearby, like the moons Europa and Enceladus.
Plant Life On Other Planets Could Be Many Colors
In “Return of the Jedi,” there is a forest moon called Endor. It's green like our home planet. But scientists think plant life on other worlds could be red, black or even rainbow-colored.
A few months ago, astronomers in Europe said they found a new planet: Proxima Centauri b. It is only four light-years away from Earth, and it orbits a tiny red star.
The planet doesn’t have sunrises or sunsets like Earth. One side always faces its sun.
“It would be a permanent sunset around the planet,” Kiang said.
As you dive deeper into Earth's ocean, seaweed changes color, from green to dark brown. Similarly, plants on a red dwarf planet might change color from the day side to the night side.
In the "Star Wars" universe, Lucas pictures many worlds bustling with intelligent beings. We know of only one such world so far — Earth. But NASA exoplanet scientists think we have a fighting chance of finding life beyond our solar system.
Over the next few years, NASA will launch new spacecraft and satellites to search for planets. Then, in the next decade, the Wide Field Infrared Survey Telescope will bring us images of new planets around sun-like stars.
That’s one step closer to finding life.
      
      