ARLINGTON NATIONAL CEMETERY, Va. — Elaine Harmon always challenged convention — even after she died.
Harmon was one of about 1,000 Women Airforce Service Pilots, or WASPs. These women flew noncombat missions for the United States during World War II. On Wednesday, Harmon was buried at Arlington National Cemetery, a military cemetery outside Washington, D.C. Her family had to fight to allow her the honor of a burial there.
During the ceremony, fighter planes buzzed overhead and a bugler played in the distance. Harmon's final wish to be buried at Arlington National Cemetery was finally realized. Her family celebrated the end of the challenging fight that made it happen.
Trailblazing Women Step Up
"When the Army desperately needed them, these trailblazing women stepped up to the task," said Terry Harmon, Elaine's daughter. "America and the world loves these women."
The WASPs delivered war planes and flew supplies where they were needed during the war.
Harmon learned to fly planes as an undergraduate at the University of Maryland. She signed up to join the WASPs in 1944 against her mother's objections.
Since the war, the women and their descendants have had to fight for respect. Because the official record of their effort was private for many years, the women were not allowed veteran status. Veteran status recognizes and honors people who have fought for the United States. This finally changed when President Jimmy Carter signed legislation in 1977 granting WASPs veteran status.
WASPs Awarded Congressional Gold Medal
In 2009, Harmon was at President Barack Obama's side as he signed a law awarding the pilots the Congressional Gold Medal.
Harmon died last year believing she would be buried at Arlington. The cemetery's manager had approved the honor for the WASPs more than 10 years earlier.
However, about a month before Harmon died at age 95, the secretary of the Army took back this decision. There was decreasing space at the cemetery, and now WASPs were no longer allowed to be buried there. 
People were outraged by the decision.
"I couldn't believe it," said Martha McSally, a Congresswoman from Arizona. McSally is also a retired female Air Force pilot.
Boy Or Girl, Just Fly And Shoot Straight
"These were feisty, brave, adventurous, patriotic women," said McSally. "The airplane doesn't care if you're a boy or a girl; it just cares if you know how to fly and shoot straight."
McSally introduced a bill in the House of Representatives to overturn the decision. Others supported similar legislation in the Senate. Congress approved the bill very quickly, less than five months after it was introduced.
In May, Obama signed a law allowing the ashes of the women to be placed above ground at Arlington. The rules about who may be buried underground are more strict.
On Wednesday, Harmon's ashes were carried by Air Force airmen to a spot in the corner of the cemetery. During the ceremony, the airmen held the American flag while a rifle team fired shots in Harmon's honor. There were tears among her family, but also a sense of celebration.
"If the WASPs were good enough to fly and risk their lives for our country, they're good enough for Arlington," said Senator Barbara A. Mikulski from Maryland. "This is an honor Lieutenant Elaine Harmon and the WASPs have earned and deserve."
Sixty Million Miles Of Missions
The WASPs flew 60 million miles during missions across the United States between 1942 and 1944. Thirty-eight of the pilots died in the line of duty, but they were not granted military funerals.
Fewer than 100 WASPs are still living. McSally said there was a sense of urgency to allow these women to be buried at Arlington.
Harmon graduated in 1936 from Eastern High School in Baltimore, Maryland. She studied bacteriology, the study of bacteria, at the University of Maryland. She joined the Civil Aeronautics Authority Program and learned to fly planes. Harmon completed her training in 1944 and was stationed at an air base near Las Vegas.
After the WASPs program ended, Harmon returned home to Maryland, where she lived with her husband, Robert Harmon.
Her family described Harmon as an adventurous soul who continued to fly in her later years. She adored her children and grandchildren. She decided to go bungee jumping in New Zealand when she turned 80.
It was that spirit, they said, that inspired their determination.
"It seemed like a very big challenge in the beginning," said Erin Miller, a granddaughter who is now writing a book about the effort. "But my grandmother never would have taken 'no' for an answer."
      
      