The U.S. government asked again Monday for a break in building an oil pipeline in North Dakota. A break would let leaders consider the effects of its route on a Native American tribe.
Pipelines are built to carry large amounts of oil or other materials over a distance where they can then be used for energy. They often go underground.
Some people have been protesting the Dakota Access Pipeline for many months. Native Americans and their supporters have camped out in the state's prairie lands to block the pipeline's route. The pipeline is set to go under the Missouri River and the man-made Lake Oahe.
The Standing Rock Sioux tribe says the project threatens its drinking water. The tribe also says building the pipeline could destroy ancient holy places. The tribe's reservation is less than a mile from the pipeline.
Court Turns Down Tribe
A month ago, the national government asked the pipeline's operator to pause construction near the area in question. The operator's name is Energy Transfer Partners. More time would give leaders a chance to look into the tribe's claims.
However, a national appeals court Sunday denied the tribe's call for a break in construction. That caused the Departments of Justice, Army and Interior to again give a statement of support. They are government departments. 
The statement said the departments look forward to serious talks about projects like this. They would talk about whether to start meeting with tribes on the projects.
The standoff between the Sioux tribe and the pipeline's builder has grown into a large protest. Indian tribes and supporters of Native Americans have been a part of it. Other protesters are people who care about nature.
The protest has also received support from famous people in Hollywood. They include Leonardo DiCaprio and Susan Sarandon. 
Star Arrested During Protest
Hollywood star Shailene Woodley was arrested Monday while protesting with about 200 others near a pipeline construction place. Woodley appeared in the "Divergent" movies.
She was charged with trespassing and being part of a riot, the Morton County Sheriff's Department said. A riot happens when a crowd gets out of control. She posted a $500 fine and will have to go to court on October 24.
Woodley showed the protest and her arrest in a video on Facebook. The video showed police with their vehicles and gear. It had gotten almost 2.4 million views by early evening.
"This Is So Scary," Actress Says
"Oh my God, there's so much riot police. ... I'm shaking, this is so scary," Woodley says in the video.
She talks as she's being arrested. "They grabbed me by my jacket and said I couldn't continue and they have giant, like, guns," she says. "They're not letting me go." 
Many police can be seen wearing helmets and carrying guns.
A total of 27 people were arrested, Rob Keller said. He works for the Sheriff's Department.
There have been clashes over the last several months among protesters, pipeline workers and police. A total of 123 arrests were made, leaders said.
If fully constructed, the pipeline would pass through four states. It would carry oil from North Dakota southeast to Illinois.
      
      