Boys start doing better in math by kindergarten, a new report says.
The report found that teachers think that boys are better in math than girls. They do not give girls enough credit for what they can do. The study was released Thursday by the American Educational Research Association (AERA).
Among children from wealthy families, the math gap starts early. However, it spreads quickly to all students in elementary school. It happens in all schools, the report says.
If schools are dealing with the problem, they're not doing it well, said Joseph Cimpian. He is in charge of the study and a professor of economics and education at New York University.
Two Test Groups
The study looked at two groups made up of several thousand students across the country. The first group took tests in the 1998-1999 school year. The second group took tests in 2010-2011. The students were in math. Teachers were also asked how good the students were in 10 areas.
Cimpian said there's been much work to encourage girls in science, technology, engineering and math (STEM). But even 12 years later, the gap is still there. There also haven't been any changes in how teachers are seeing girls.
What Are "Girl Things"?
"There still exists a notion that math and science are not really ‘girl’ subjects,” said Dina Weinberg of Bronx, New York. She is a math tutor and used to teach school.
Elementary school girls are better behaved than boys, Weinberg said. Teachers may treat them differently.
Without meaning to, teachers may call on the boys more often to solve problems, Weinberg said.
Parents and teachers should become aware of their feelings about how boys and girls should act, said Reshma Saujani. She is the head of Girls Who Code. The group teaches computer coding to girls. That is the first step.
Teachers Have Best Intentions
“I think teachers often have the best intentions. They’ve picked a career that’s all about helping our young people. But we’re all influenced by a culture that says that subjects like math and computing are for boys,” she said.
“Our culture is telling all of us — teachers included — that math and computing is not for girls," Saujani said. "It’s no wonder it’s showing up in our classrooms."
How Wealth Changes Things
On average, boys and girls do the same in math when they first enter kindergarten. There is one exception, though. Among wealthy families, boys do better than girls, the report said.
The reason isn’t known, Cimpian said. However, other studies show that wealthier families put daughters in "girls" activities, like dance lessons. They sign boys up for "boys" activities, like sports. This may make the math gap worse.
Learning About Bias
Cimpian said that teachers should learn about bias. They spend so much time with students, they are a really important group.
Girls Who Code provides training for teachers to identify how they think boys and girls should act.  It also highlights women in tech to make sure students see good role models.
Saujani said that people need to change what they think a programmer or a mathematician looks like. She pointed to a series of videos done by Girls Who Code. They are about the false ideas that keep women out of tech.
Gender Gaps Have Closed Elsewhere
It may sound like a huge problem, but it can be solved, Saujani said. In the last 30 years, gender gaps have closed careers, like law and medicine. Now there are many women doctors and lawyers. “I think we can see the same thing happen in computing," she said.
People must be willing to do something about it, though, she said.
      
      