A simple note is all it took. A restaurant in London, England, put the paper note in its window last month.
"No one eats alone on a Christmas Day!" it read. "We are here to sit with you. ... Any homeless or elderly are welcomed." The elderly are older people. 
The note listed the free meal the restaurant would serve from noon to 6 p.m. on Christmas. Soup and dip would start the meal. Chicken or vegetable dishes would be the main course. Dessert would be rice pudding.
The paper sign was put up on the windows of the Shish Restaurant. The restaurant also posted a picture of the sign online in November. Shish asked people to share it with anyone who might be alone on Christmas.
A Note Like No Other
Any other year, the restaurant's offer might not have gotten much attention. It might have been quietly noted as a nice Christmas act. 
This year, however, it seems to have taken on extra meaning. The restaurant is owned and run by Muslims. The kind note comes at a time when a record number of anti-Islam events have happened in Britain and around the world. Islam is one of the world's main religions. Its followers are called Muslims. There are many different kinds of Islam, just like there are different kinds of Christianity.
Some people have said that there are too many immigrants, such as Muslims, in Britain. Immigrants are people who move in from other countries. Some have said immigrants take jobs from British people.
Shish's note made people notice.
Restaurant Is Happy To Help Neighbors
Photos of the restaurant's sign have been "liked" and shared many times by computer on social media. Hundreds of people have commented. Many praised the restaurant for its generous offer during difficult times for Muslims.
"Shish, you have no idea how much I love this," a Facebook user named Stephen wrote. He wrote online: "I have been (saying) forever that we need to stop blaming everyone else and step up and help those around us and not leave it to others. This is just amazing and I'm going to share your page to all I know. You guys are awesome for doing this," he said.
The restaurant replied to him. Shish said the move was to help their neighbors, not to become famous.
"Yes we are not living in a wonderful world at the moment, and (it is) time for us to come together to stand up for each other," Shish's reply read. "We will always be there and look after each other. Christmas is an amazing day as everyone should have the chance of having a wonderful day."
The restaurant thanked Lynch for his message.
Growing From An Act Of Kindness
Shish's website says it has been in London since 1993.
Irsan Can Genc runs the restaurant. Genc said that the idea for the free Christmas meal came after an older woman came to the restaurant. She asked if anyone could help her close a window.
Restaurant workers helped her and the woman said while thanking them that she would be alone for Christmas.
Serdar Kigili is the owner of Shish. The woman reminded him of his mother in Turkey, whom he had not seen in five years, he told a news agency.
Workers began planning what they could do for other people who might be alone on Christmas.
People have been kind in return. Genc said that 40 to 50 people have so far offered to cook, clean or drive people to and from the restaurant on Christmas Day.
      
      