BALTIMORE, Md. — Brad Snyder loves to swim. Sometimes when he is in the pool he even forgets he is blind. 
Snyder lost his sight in 2011 because of a bomb. He was fighting in Afghanistan. 
Getting Ready For The Paralympic Summer Games
These days Snyder is getting ready for the Paralympic Summer Games. The games take place every four years. They are a big sporting event for athletes with disabilities. Athletes from all over the world compete. 
Some of the athletes are in wheelchairs or are missing an arm or leg. Others are blind like Snyder. All are top players in their sports.
In 2012, Snyder traveled to London for the games. He had just lost his sight. Still, he won two races and came in second in another.
Later this month, Snyder will set off again. This time, he will be heading to the 2016 Paralympic Games. They are happening in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
Snyder will swim in six races. He is particularly good at freestyle swimming. He is ranked first in the world among blind swimmers. 
"I feel like I'm the best freestyler in the world," said Snyder. 
Swimming Helped Him Feel Like His Old Self Again
Snyder was once captain of a swim team. Two months after he became blind he was back in a swimming pool. Swimming helped him feel like his old self again. 
Within four months, he was asked to try out for the Paralympics. Five months later he was swimming in his first race. 
Swimming became a way to get over his blindness. It helped bring back the old happy Snyder.
Snyder swam very well at the London Paralympics. The games made him famous. 
His Story Could Give Others The Courage To Try Hard
Snyder soon realized his story could inspire others. It could give them the courage to try hard. It could make them feel as if they can do whatever they set out to do, no matter what problems they have. 
Snyder decided to try out for another Paralympics. He began training for the 2016 Rio games.
Today, there are many people who would do anything to help him. They are inspired by his courage and hard work.
"He's Unbelievable"
"He's unbelievable," said his coach, Brian Loeffler. "You can't help but be inspired by him."
Snyder may even try for a third Paralympic Games. Those games will take place in Tokyo, Japan. They will be held in 2020. 
Snyder wants to inspire others for as long as he can.
      
      