BALTIMORE, Md. — Swimming is what Brad Snyder loves best. Sometimes when he is speeding through a pool he even forgets he is blind. 
Snyder lost his sight in 2011 when a bomb blew up in his face. He was in the Navy then, and fighting in Afghanistan. 
Olympics For Athletes With Disabilities
These days Snyder is focused on the Paralympic Summer Games. The games take place every four years. They are the Olympics for athletes with disabilities. Some of the athletes are in wheelchairs or are missing an arm or leg. Others are blind like Snyder. All are top players in their sports.
Two Gold Medals, One Silver In 2012
In 2012, Snyder traveled to London for the games. He had just lost his sight. Still, he came back with two gold medals and one silver medal.
Later this month, Snyder will set off again. This time he will be heading to Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, for the 2016 Paralympic Games. 
Particularly Good At Freestyle Swimming
Snyder will swim in six events. He is particularly good at freestyle swimming.
"I feel like I'm the best freestyler in the world," said Snyder. In fact, he is ranked first in the world among blind swimmers. 
Snyder was once the captain of a Navy swim team. Two months after losing his sight he was back in a swimming pool. Returning to the water helped him feel like his old self again, he said. 
Within four months, he was asked to try out for the Paralympics. Within five months he was swimming in his first race. 
Snyder won the second of his two gold medals on September 7, 2012. He had lost his sight exactly one year earlier. 
A Bomb Exploded Just In Front Of Him
On September 7, 2011, Snyder rushed to help two men who had stepped on a buried bomb. Snyder stepped on a second bomb, which exploded just in front of him. The blast hit his face. 
Doctors were unable to save Snyder's sight. His damaged eyes were replaced with glass ones.
Snyder's family and friends were all very upset, of course.
"In the beginning, everybody was like, 'Oh, my gosh, we're so sorry,' " Snyder said. "People were crying, people were upset."
Swimming became a way to turn things around. It helped bring back the old happy Snyder.
In some ways, having to train for the London Paralympics made things easy, Snyder said. It allowed him to think only about swimming. 
Facing His New Life As A Blind Person
After Snyder got back from London things became difficult for him. He was forced to think about his new life as a blind person. Snyder began trying to figure out how he could live a happy and useful life.
Snyder realized he was now somewhat famous. He decided he might be able to inspire others like him. Perhaps his story could give others the courage to try hard. 
Snyder decided he would give the Paralympics one more go. Soon, he began training for the 2016 Rio games.
Inspired By His Courage And Hard Work
Today, Snyder has many friends and coaches who would do anything to help him. All are inspired by his courage and hard work.
"He's unbelievable," said coach Brian Loeffler. "You can't help but be inspired by him."
Snyder may even try for a third Paralympic Games, in Tokyo. Those games will take place in 2020. 
Snyder is not just thinking about staying busy. He wants to keep on inspiring others for as long as he can.
      
      