Millipedes, the little blunt-headed bugs with a habit of coiling up, rarely live up to their name. "Millipede" means "thousand feet" in Latin. Most of them, though, do not have more than 100 feet.
That is not to say these critters need more feet. They have plenty. A newly described type of millipede almost lives up to the "thousand feet" name. It was found living alone in a small California cave. It had 414 tiny walking appendages, the second-highest number of legs of any animal on the planet.
At a glance, the millipede in question might not look like much. It's a bit like a plastic-coated shoelace tip gone fuzzy. Appearances can be deceptive, though, even those of tiny pale worms. Its body was less than an inch long. It was packed with some very strange body parts, however.
The scientists examined the millipede. They discovered it had a whopping 207 pairs of legs. They named it Illacme tobini. 
Creature Uses Poison To Defend Itself
After the scientists sliced the body open, they found 200 pores dotting the length of his body. Some of those holes had an "unidentified secretion" coming out. The scientists believed it could be a poison it uses to defend itself. Its bristly mouth parts were strange. Their shape suggested the animal may have eaten only fungus. It also lacked eyes. 
Discovering the single Illacme tobini was no easy job. Biologists made a number of trips to caves within California's Sequoia National Park. They searched the area from 2002 to 2004. Then they searched again from 2006 to 2009.
To millipede experts, collecting very rare arthropods is serious business. The scientists would not say exactly where they found the animal. They wanted to keep it secret.
Only once did a biologist find the completely new animal. Cave biologist Jean K. Krejca was exploring a marble cave in October of 2006. She found a strange-looking bug and took it.
Many-Legged Millipedes Disappear Again
Krejca sent the bug to a scientist named Paul Marek. Marek studies insects at Virginia Tech University. He found a close cousin of Illacme tobini in a valley in San Benito County, California. This discovery was also in 2006.
Government scientists first reported that animal, called I. plenipes, in 1926. Another millipede of its kind had 750 legs. That is a record that stands to this day. Until Marek found it again, the I. plenipes had not been seen for 90 years.
Marek and his partners confirmed that both the I. plenipes and Illacme tobini millipedes were related. "I never would have expected that a second kind of the leggiest animal on the planet would be discovered in a cave 150 miles away," Marek said.
There was no sign of another Illacme tobini between 2010 and 2012. Still, the scientists searched. The biologists carefully searched 63 other places in the Sierra Nevada foothills and El Dorado National Forest.
They flipped over decaying logs. They ruffled through leaves. They overturned large stones. They found plenty of other arthropods, like flies and spiders.
For now, though, it looks like the many-legged millipedes have repeated their disappearing act.
      
      