MEXICO CITY, Mexico  — Dressed in their familiar silver and black uniforms, the Raiders players huddle before kickoff. After words of encouragement and a prayer, the teenagers finish with head butts and shoulder slaps. Their battle cry is in Spanish: "Uno, dos, tres...vamos!" ("One, two, three...let's go!")
This is Mexico, where football has a long history. It rivals soccer in popularity, and millions of kids like the "Raiders de Arboleda" play "futbol americano" — American football — every weekend.
The National Football League (NFL) returns to Mexico after leaving for 11 years. The Houston Texans face the Oakland Raiders in a regular-season game November 21 in sold-out Azteca Stadium. For the "Mexican" Raiders and others across the country, football is as popular in Mexico as soccer, boxing and traditional lucha libre wrestling.
"Football gives you the chance to take your passion to the field," said Raiders quarterback Gabriel Ayana. He is 16 years old.
The NFL has around 25 million fans in Mexico, the biggest number outside the United States. Its base "is still growing," said Arturo Olive, head of the NFL office in Mexico. The league has 6,500 teams in youth programs in 27 of 32 Mexican states, up from 120 teams in six states just eight years ago. He estimates 2.5 million kids play flag football in elementary schools.
Even A Six-Team Pro League
Soccer is popular in Mexico, so the great love of football might be surprising. Mexico has two popular college leagues with 36 teams and a six-team professional league, though. Up to 10 NFL games are on TV each week.
The local soccer league has nine games each week. Not all of them are on TV.
Fans can even watch the Thursday and Monday night football games at the movie theater. Soccer gets the big-screen treatment only for World Cup matches.
Football was introduced in the country in 1896 by Mexican students returning home from U.S. colleges. They brought back "an oval shaped ball," said Alejandro Morales. Morales is a local football historian and founder of Mexico's football hall of fame. He said the first official match pitted students and their friends against a team of American sailors from a U.S. ship anchored in the nearby port.
Soon after, several teams were created in Veracruz. Eventually, the sport spread to Mexico City and local colleges. UNAM (National Autonomous University of Mexico), the national state university with over 200,000 students, started playing in the 1920s. By the '50s, most of the Mexican colleges were playing the game that, at the time, rivaled soccer in popularity. 
"Back then, football used to share the spotlight with soccer," Morales said. "Eventually that faded, because football was not seen as a business. It was played in college, and they just wanted to help the students while soccer was run by professionals."
NFL Came To Mexico In 1978
Although football fell behind soccer, it remained hugely popular. The NFL noticed. On August 5, 1978, the Philadelphia Eagles played the New Orleans Saints in a preseason game in Mexico City. About 30,000 fans packed the stadium to watch the Saints' 14-7 win in the first NFL game south of the border and only the second played outside the U.S. or Canada.
The NFL returned 16 years later. In 1994, the Houston Oilers played the Dallas Cowboys in Azteca Stadium in the first of six preseason American Bowls hosted by Mexico. The last was in 2001, when the Raiders played the Cowboys in the same venue.
The first regular-season game was played in 2005, when the Arizona Cardinals played the San Francisco 49ers in front of 103,467 fans in Azteca Stadium, then an NFL record. Since 2007, the league has held games annually in Britain. It had not returned to Mexico until now.
Sellout In Under 2 Hours
Azteca Stadium was built in 1966. It is home to a popular soccer team. It underwent several renovations to meet NFL standards, including new locker rooms for the football teams, new ramps, and improved communication systems. The capacity decreased from 100,000 to 84,000 to improve seating, and all tickets were sold out in less than two hours, Olive said.
Most fans will be rooting for the Raiders, the fifth-most popular team in Mexico behind the Pittsburgh Steelers, Cowboys, New England (Boston) Patriots and 49ers, according to the NFL. Among them will be Ayana and his friends from the Raiders team in Arboleda, a smaller town north of the city.
"A lot of players on the team have been playing here since they were little kids and are Raider fans," Ayana said. "They are very excited about the game."
      
      