People have been asking for comic books to feature superheroes of color. Now that they have them, what do they want from them?
Marvel Cancels "Nighthawk"
That is what I have been wondering since Marvel confirmed last month that it had canceled "Nighthawk."
"Nighthawk" was a dark and gritty comic series set in Chicago. Its hero was a black man in a mask. He fought police who were not honest. He fought to keep poor people from being pushed out of their neighborhood. He fought racism. There have been four issues of "Nighthawk" so far. Only two more will be published. 
Marvel has another character called Night Thrasher. He is a well-known black superhero. I once suggested that they place him in Baltimore. I thought he could take on a police force that is known to be disrespectful to black people. Meanwhile, Nighthawk was a hero with a similar mission.
Comic Books And Diversity
Comics have made progress with diversity, however. They have created a mix of superheroes that look like our population. Nighthawk was a superhero of color working on the problems of people of color. His series was canceled after six issues. This does not give fans much faith that there will be more comic heroes like him in the future. 
"Nighthawk" was giving comics the diversity that fans have asked for on social media. It featured a black hero and was written by a black writer, David F. Walker. The stories were about the problems of black people in a major city. Its cover art was done by renowned black comic book artist Denys Cowan. But "Nighthawk" will only make it to one collected volume as a graphic novel, or a story told in drawings published as a book. Sales just were not strong enough.
Bad Timing For "Nighthawk"?
It is too easy to say "black superheroes don't sell." That's an oversimplification of the situation. Joseph P. Illidge recently wrote for Comic Book Resources that "Nighthawk" was drowned out by two major comic book events. One was Marvel's "Civil War II." The other was DC Comics' successful "Rebirth" re-launch. They took a lot of the fans' attention when "Nighthawk" first came out.  
Ta-Nehisi Coates' "Black Panther" comic is doing well and receiving praise. Nick Spencer is telling one of the more intriguing "Captain America" stories in recent years with his black hero Sam Wilson. 
"Black Panther" and "Captain America" are two major series from the Marvel universe. They are also two of the most popular superheroes around. They were seen in big summer movies. Nighthawk is a not a well-known hero. Not everyone has read the Marvel comic series "Squadron Supreme" in which he appeared. Should stories about the problems of black Americans have been handled with another, more recognizable character? Or are these problems too serious for Marvel to allow them to affect their most famous heroes of color?
Do Readers Prefer Fantasy?
Of course, even those top heroes of color occasionally feel the sting of prejudice. The world was fascinated to know Spider-Man had brown skin under his spidey-suit when his costume was torn. Captain America deals with racist remarks. The Black Panther is dealing with a revolution in Wakanda, the African nation he rules. Yet these things are nothing like what Nighthawk was going up against.
Maybe when it comes to comic book heroes of color, readers want more fantasy than reality. Comic books can be a great escape. Super-powers. Secret lives. Masks. A make-believe African paradise led by a panther king. These things can be visually absorbed a lot easier than a bird-man taking on real-world types of injustice.
Credit should be given to Marvel Comics for giving a series like "Nighthawk" a try. Marvel should also be asked why they were so quick to end it. Sales numbers matter. But every now and then the message is a little more important than just making money.

David Betancourt writes about all aspects of comic book culture for the Washington Post's Comic Riffs blog.

      
      