TV companies who show National Football League (NFL) games are worried.
Fewer people are watching NFL football games. With fewer viewers, they get less money for the commercials. There may be many reasons for fewer viewers. The first is the interest in the presidential election. Another worry is the increase in online streaming. Missing star football players, boring games and protests against the national anthem could also be part of the problem. 
Fewer Viewers, But Still A Lot
TV networks like CBS, NBC, Fox and ESPN pay the NFL about $5 billion every year to show the NFL games. “Thursday Night Football” lost 18 percent of their viewers. NBC’s “Sunday Night Football” lost 19 percent. ESPN’s “Monday Night Football” is down 24 percent. Sunday afternoon telecasts on Fox and CBS are also down, but not as much.
The NFL knows the numbers are lower this year. But, they are still higher than everything else on TV. Through six weeks, NFL games were seen by 16.25 million viewers. Only 6.9 million viewers have been watching other prime-time TV shows. But the ratings also show fans are not watching the whole game.
News about the presidential election campaign has hurt. When games are on, more men are watching cable news channels. This was not happening last year. Advertisers on football want to reach men between the ages of 25 and 54. 
Who Holds The Trump Card?
The presidential debates between candidates Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton are cutting into the time fans watch the NFL.
The first presidential debate between Trump and Clinton was on September 26. More than 84 million watched it. This took viewers away from ESPN’s “Monday Night Football." The second debate, on October 9, had 66.5 million viewers. NBC’s “Sunday Night Football” had fewer fans watching, too.
The last year the NFL’s ratings dropped was in 2012. President Barack Obama ran for re-election against Mitt Romney. NFL ratings have been down around presidential elections since 1996. But the numbers in 2016 have never been this low.
Too Many Penalties? No
NFL owners say the reasons for this need more study.
One worry is that online streaming has cut into TV watching. Younger people are streaming more. To reach younger audiences, the NFL started streaming Thursday night football games.
Some have said there are too many penalties and this is the reason fewer fans are watching. But in the first six weeks of the season, the number of penalties is lower than last season.
Some believe the lower ratings have to do with who has not been on the field. The NFL season opened without three of its biggest star quarterbacks. Tom Brady of the New England Patriots was suspended for the first four weeks. Dallas Cowboys starter Tony Romo has been out with an injury and Peyton Manning has retired.
NFL Needs Second-Half Comeback
Some say the fans are protesting against San Francisco 49ers quarterback Colin Kaepernick. He took a knee during the playing of the national anthem. He was protesting violence against African Americans by police. But the station that shows the 49ers games, said Sunday afternoon games have about the same number of viewers as last year.
Many think the NFL’s ratings will improve in the second half of the season. Games will be more important, as teams try to get into the playoffs.
Others believe football ratings will go up after the election. Still, others worry that the public’s habits are changing. Netflix and Amazon are getting more of the viewers’ attention than live TV.
      
      