WASHINGTON, D.C. — In the past, black and white children did not go to school together. This happened mainly in the southern parts of the U.S. The U.S. Supreme Court is the country's highest court. In 1964, it made an important decision. It was a court case called Brown v. Board of Education. The judges said separating black and white children was unfair. Black schools were usually worse than white schools. Black children were not getting an equal education.
Now, many black and Hispanic children are again going to different schools than white children. A new government report came out Tuesday. It says the problem is getting worse.
Poor Schooling
Black and Hispanic children go to schools that are more poor than the schools for white children. The study looked at the years between 2001 and 2014. The number of these schools doubled.
The students were not just separated, the report said. Black and Hispanic kids did not have the same opportunities as other students.
These schools often did not have as many math and science classes. They also were more likely to punish students more strictly.
Unfair Treatment In America
Lawmakers asked the government to look into the problem. Two lawmakers plan to suggest a new law. It would make it easier for parents to ask a judge to stop the problem in their area.
One of the lawmakers was Bobby Scott from Virginia. The problem is not getting better, Scott said. It is getting worse. More than 20 million black and Hispanic students go to very poor schools. Most of the kids there are also black and Hispanic.
People only began talking recently about the problem. It is part of a larger discussion about black people being treated unfairly.
On Friday, a judge ordered a town to combine its middle and high schools. The town was Cleveland, Mississippi. Blacks and whites were going to separate schools. The school district was breaking the law, Judge Debra Brown said. Students were not getting a fair education.
It Is About Bringing People Together
Edward Duvall lives in Cleveland. He is black and has two children. He said it was a good idea to combine the schools. It would save money. Yet, he had another reason. He said that separate schools are racist. They divide people. It is important to send black and white children to school together, he said. It will unite them and the whole city.
      
      