MARRAKECH, Morocco — The result of the U.S. presidential election on Tuesday is alarming environmentalists and scientists at U.N. climate talks in Morocco. The election of a man who has called global warming a "hoax" is raising questions about whether America, once again, would pull out of an international climate deal.
The newly elected president, Donald Trump, threatened during his campaign to undo President Barack Obama's climate policies. Several scientists warned that this could mean Earth will reach dangerously high levels of warming.
Many people at the climate talks in Morocco said it is now up to the rest of the world to lead efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Others hoped that Trump would change his position and honor U.S. commitments to the Paris Agreement, which went into effect on November 4.
"Now that the election campaign has passed and the realities of leadership settle in, I expect he will realize that climate change is a threat to his people and to whole countries which share seas with the U.S., including my own," Marshall Islands President Hilda Heine said in a statement. Small island nations fear they will be swallowed by rising seas.
Election Win Is Called Environmental Disaster
More than 100 countries, including the United States, have formally joined the agreement. It seeks to reduce emissions while helping countries adapt to rising seas, intensifying heat waves, the spreading of deserts and other changes from man-made warming.
"I'm sure that the rest of the world will continue to work on it," Moroccan chief negotiator Aziz Mekouar said at the climate talks.
Others were not so sure, with scientists and environmental activists calling Trump's election a disaster for the planet.
"The Paris Agreement and any U.S. leadership in international climate progress is dead," said Dana Fisher, director of an environmental program at the University of Maryland. However, the movement toward cleaner energy is established enough that it would continue without federal money, she added.
Presidents Have Taken Differing Views
Under President George Bush, the United States declined to join the climate deal in 1997, the Kyoto Protocol. Without the United States, the deal did not have a significant impact. When President Obama was elected in 2008, he made climate change a priority. He became very influential in helping the Paris accord come together in December 2015.
However, Trump pledged in May to "cancel" the Paris deal.
The goal of the deal is to keep the rise in the global temperature below 2 degrees Celsius (3.6 degrees Fahrenheit), compared with the global temperature before the Industrial Revolution. Temperatures, however, have already gone up by half that amount.
Michael Oppenheimer, a Princeton University climate scientist, said that without U.S. involvement, the impact of the Paris Agreement would be reduced greatly. He warned that it would be impossible to avoid a 2-degree temperature rise without the help of the United States.
Regulations In Flux
The United States is responsible for about 21 percent of the deal's expected reductions in gasses through 2030, according to Drew Jones, co-director of a group of climate emissions researchers.
Trump has called for removing regulations on the production of coal, oil and natural gas. He has also promised to repeal the Clean Power Plan, an Obama administration strategy to fight climate change.
Trump told an oil and gas conference in North Dakota that he would "save the coal industry." He promised to stop using tax money for global warming programs.
It is unlikely that Trump's actions would reopen coal mines or coal-fired power plants. The availability of cheaper natural gas as a result of fracking has squashed the coal industry in the United States, said Jay Apt, co-director of the Carnegie Mellon Electricity Industry Center. Fracking, a process that many claim is harmful to the environment, drills into the earth for gasses. Apt said the nation might use even less coal if Trump opens more drilling and the price of natural gas drops.
U.S. Withdrawal Would Not Be Quick
The pro-fossil fuels American Energy Alliance said Trump's victory presents a chance to reset "harmful energy policies" in the United States. Yet shocked American activists cried and embraced at the climate talks in Morocco.
Li Shuo, a climate policy expert in China, said his country would continue to work on climate change "out of its own very genuine concern."
U.S. withdrawal from the deal would take four years — an entire presidential term — under the terms of the agreement. However, Trump could also decide to simply ignore the U.S. pledge to reduce emissions by 2025. There is no punishment for countries that miss their targets.
"If the U.S. drags its feet on climate in the next four years, then there is nothing stopping the rest of the world doing an awful lot," Norwegian scientist Glen Peters said.
Trump's surprising win sparked hopes among the minority of researchers who do not believe that global warming is a major threat.
"The danger just isn't there," John Christy of the University of Alabama, Huntsville, said.
      
      