In some countries, people eat whales, dolphins, seals, cats and horses. But the strange food that seems to bother people the most is the East Asian custom of eating dogs.
On Friday, animal-rights supporters from around the globe asked the Chinese government to stop a dog-meat festival. It is set to take place this month in the Chinese city of Yulin.
The festival is not liked by everyone. Eleven million people have signed their name to a petition trying to stop it.
Thousands Of Dogs Will Be Killed
About 30 million dogs are killed in Asia every year for their meat. More than one-third of those dogs are from China, animal rights supporters say. Thousands of dogs will be killed for the festival, which starts June 21. 
The Chinese government used to not want people to own pets. It had a government system where the government owned most of everything, called communism. Its communist leader did not want people to own pets. He told people it was snobby. China also had famine. Between 1959 and 1961, the Chinese people had limited food. Many people living in the countryside would eat any animal they could get their hands on.
China Becomes More Modern
As China became more modern though, more people owned pets. Many modern Chinese people now do not want animals like dogs or cats to be eaten. Young people especially are fighting for animal rights.
A survey by a Chinese TV channel said that more than half of people want dog eating to be against the law. But many others do not.
Peter Li works for Humane Society International (HSI). This group works to protect animals around the world. Li said that China's dog-meat trade mistreats animals. The custom also makes China look bad to other countries, he said.
People who want to have the festival argue that eating dog meat has been a part of Chinese life for thousands of years. They say that eating dog meat is healthy. In parts of China and South Korea, people eat dog meat to stay cool during the summer.
"I also want to point out that the dogs we eat are specially raised for their meat," one Chinese man posted online. "We don't eat pet dogs! It's just like people eat carp but don't eat goldfish!"
Do Pets Make It Onto The Plate?
Still, animal-rights groups say the Yulin festival was only invented in 2010 by dog traders to make more money. They say many dogs have been kidnapped because of it.
In the past few weeks, animal-rights supporters said they have rescued about 500 dogs who were going to be killed. They said that many of the dogs were pets. There have been many angry fights between pet owners and dog thieves, they said.
Animal-rights supporters think they are making progress. In 2011, another dog-meat festival in China was canceled because of people complaining online, the New York Times reported.
HSI's Li said that officials in Yulin had already made the dog-meat festival smaller and removed any government involvement. This was because so many people are against the festival. Two slaughterhouses and a dog market have also closed in the last few years.
The Public Supports The Cause
For the first time, the Yulin government agreed to consider the animal rights supporters' wish to stop the fair. This shows progress, Li said. He said HSI would soon release a survey showing that the public agrees with their cause. It says that 7 in 10 Chinese people have never eaten dog meat.
On Monday, Chinese law professor Chang Jiwen argued in a newspaper article that the government should not allow any posters or announcements for the dog-meat festival. That would help to end it, he said.
Jiwen said that China invests a large amount of money, time and effort in improving the way China presents itself to the world. He and his team say that those efforts could be for nothing because of the dog-meat festival.
      
      