"The Black Mambas are winning the war on poaching,” insists Siphiwe Sithole. “We have absolutely zero tolerance for rhino poaching and the illegal wildlife trade. The poachers will fall – but it will not be with guns and bullets.”
Sithole and Felicia Mogakane are members of South Africa’s Black Mambas, the world’s first all-female anti-poaching unit. They have captured the public’s imagination by reducing rhino deaths. Their most powerful weapon in the war on poaching, however, has been breaking down the barriers between poor communities and elite wildlife reserves. It is this success that has won them their second international conservation award from the United Kingdom charity Helping Rhinos. The award recognizes projects that have shown positive results in protecting rhinos. 
The Black Mambas were formed in 2013. Since then, snaring and poaching incidents have gone down 76 percent within their area of operation in the country's Balule Nature Reserve. The private reserve, which is about 155 square miles, is home to the big five of rhinos, lions, elephants, buffaloes and leopards. It also has zebras, antelopes, wildebeests, cheetahs, giraffes, hippos, crocodiles and hundreds of species of trees and birds.
Parks Want Another Ranger Team
In the six months before the Mambas were set up, 16 rhinos were lost in Balule. In the 12 months after they started patrolling Balule, only three rhinos died.
Thousands of snares to catch animals for bush meat have been removed, and three bush meat kitchens were put out of action. Ten poacher camps were destroyed and six poachers were arrested. The Mambas have been so successful that South Africa’s national parks authority plans for another team of six female rangers.
Last year the Mambas won the Champions of the Earth prize, the UN’s highest environmental honor. 
“Winning these awards (is) good because it’s about knowing that people from South Africa love and appreciate what we are doing and they are so happy that there are Mambas,” says Mogakane, 28, who has been with the team from the start. “Unlike some years ago, when they used to say this job is for men, now there are women who are working to protect the wildlife."
Unarmed, They Protect Endangered Species
The Mambas were founded by Craig Spencer, head warden of the Balule reserve. Their job was to act as an unarmed but visible frontline presence in the ongoing battle against the poaching of rhinos and other endangered species. They are like British cops on the beat. 
“Craig saw there were men rangers carrying guns but still the rhinos were being killed and lots of animals were being poached,” said 32-year-old Sithole. “I think he said, ‘Let me start something and put women on board and see what happens’ because women are more loyal to their jobs; they are passionate about what they do."
The 26 Mambas are all from poor communities on the border of the park. They have been given six weeks of paramilitary training and wildlife education and work alongside 29 armed guards and an intelligence team that seeks to stop the poachers before they can kill.
Day-to-day duties include patrols of up to 20 kilometers (12 miles) a day on foot and by vehicle at night, pulling out snares, conducting roadblocks and assisting with tracking collars.
Poachers Hope To Get Rich With Rhinos
Mogakane says: “Firstly, poaching was for bush meat. People say, ‘We don’t have jobs so we must go inside the reserve and poach some impala so that we can sell it and get some money to buy groceries for our family.’ In most cases now, people come in for rhinos, because they want to get rich, drive some fancy cars and build a nice house.”
South Africa has the largest population of rhinos in the world, about 19,000. The country has seen a huge spike in the rate of rhino poaching in recent years, with many of these incidents taking place in protected national parks. Last year 1,175 rhinos were poached. Still, 2015 is the first year that numbers had not risen since the alarming trend began after 2007, when just 13 were killed.

Rhino horn has become so valuable the conservationists warn that the species could become extinct in 10 years.
Ranger Jobs Set A Good Example
It is sought after in Vietnam and China, where rich, fashionable people use it as a traditional medicinal cure and party drug. International criminal groups charge almost $83,500 per kilogram ($38,000 a pound) for an illegal substance that is worth more than gold but is no different from human fingernails.
Money is driving much of the poaching, the Mambas say. A night in a luxury suite in one of the local game reserves, seen as the preserve of rich tourists, can cost at least $345. In many cases, people living in the surrounding villages do not have access to these reserves, or their profits. With more than 85 percent of the local population unemployed, some see it as more valuable to hunt the rhinos than preserve them.
It is hoped the Mambas can bridge this gap by showing that local black people from poor communities can get jobs and education in the reserves, too. The war on poaching will be won by being role models and educating the local community and not with guns and bullets, they say. 
The Mambas have also started an outreach program called Bush Babies with 10 local schools. “Before we started it, people were not aware,” Sithole says. “But now we teach the kids, and they go back home and send the messages to their parents. They might know now that if they continue to do this, we might end up without any rhino.”
      
      