I first learned about an effort to start a national museum dedicated to African-American history and culture during my first term in Congress. I was elected in 1986. Two years later, Democratic Representative Mickey Leland of Texas asked me to co-sponsor it with him.
I have loved history ever since I was a boy. It started when I was so young. To celebrate Negro History Week – now called Black History Month – my teachers would ask us to cut out pictures in magazines and newspapers of famous African-Americans, such as civil rights activist Rosa Parks and scientist and inventor George Washington Carver. Growing up in Alabama near Tuskegee Institute, an African-American college, I knew the power of history. I was on board with the museum idea and Mickey did not have to ask me twice.
Unfortunately, he died less than a year later. I introduced the museum bill in every session of Congress for 15 years.
Giving Up Wasn't An Option
Giving up on dreams is not an option for me. Hope in the face of challenge is the only alternative I see. I knew that if I was persistent and consistent, I would at least play my role well in this effort, and at most, I could win a victory for humanity.
So I continued to introduce the legislation in every session of Congress and worked to find a way to get the bill through. Eventually, it passed the House and Senate and was signed into law in 2003 by President George W. Bush. The idea began exactly 100 years ago by a group of people who helped black Civil War veterans.
On May 24, 1916, the National Memorial Association held a meeting in Washington, D.C. Its members discussed creating "a beautiful building" in Washington. They wanted to celebrate the contributions of African-Americans in the military, art, literature, invention, science, industry and other areas of life. On this Sept. 24, exactly 100 years and four months later, the National Museum of African American History and Culture will finally open in Washington. It will be placed at the foot of the Washington Monument, which honors our country's first president.
African-American Men And Women Helped Build America
Millions of black men and women built this country through hard labor, sacrifice and suffering. They built it through creativity and ingenuity, willpower and faith. They have fought in every war and defended democracy, although they could not vote. They did this because they believed in something greater than themselves. They had faith and an ability to make a way out of no way. That is why this museum deserves a prominent place among the memorials to the founders of this country.
People know so little about African-American history.
Some people think that race, for example, is no longer a problem in America. Why? Because we spent the last part of the 1900s burying any discussion of a racial divide and ignored the anger many black people feel. We believed our denial would somehow make the problem go away.
But the unrest in our society today demonstrates that avoiding the truth is impossible. Covering a wound without treating it first increases the danger of infection. The truth can lead to only one conclusion: We are one people, one family, the American family. We all live in one house, the American house, the world house. It will lead us to see that we are more alike than we are different, that we are not separate but we are one. That is why this museum can have a healing effect on our society.
We Can't Ignore The "Uncomfortable Parts"
Let the truth speak to our hearts and minds. Let this museum share the complete truth, without sweeping the uncomfortable parts into some dark corner or under a rug.
Ultimately the African-American story is a collection of some of the most inspiring stories in human history. It is the story of those who were denied equal rights, but who laid down their lives in every generation to redeem the soul of America. "When the history books are written in future generations," Martin Luther King Jr. once said, "the historians will have to pause and say, 'There lived a great people – a black people – who injected new meaning and dignity into the veins of civilization.'"

Democratic Representative John Lewis of Georgia was a civil rights leader and was beaten in 1965 protesting segregation.  In June, he led a lawmaker sit-in on the House floor over gun control. He also has co-written a set of civil rights novels.

      
      