Going to the movies in India will soon be very different. The Indian Supreme Court decided that the national anthem must be played before all movies. This is meant to make people feel loyal to India.
The Court also said that people must stand up while the anthem is played. Not doing so would be disrespectful. 
This case was based on a lawsuit. The lawsuit argued that the national anthem was being dishonored. It said that one place the anthem was not being honored was in movie theaters.
The anthem is called "Jana Gana Mana." It was ordered to be played in movie theaters in 1962. This was largely ignored. They eventually stopped playing it.
Movie Industry Fight Between India And Pakistan
Indian movies often talk about significant issues facing the country. One is the fight between religious groups.
The movie industry recently got caught up in one of these fights. It was a fight between Indians and Pakistanis. India and Pakistan are neighbors. India is mostly Hindu. Pakistan is mostly Muslim. 
An Indian film association made a big decision. It said that it was not going to let Pakistanis be in Indian movies. This came after 19 Indians were killed. The people who killed them were thought to have Pakistani help. 
Nationalists in India liked this. Nationalism is when leaders' words and actions revolve around the ideas of shared national identity. Nationalism can cause conflicts when people disagree about what it means to belong to a certain nation.
Different Opinions On The Ruling
In 2014, Narendra Modi was elected prime minister of India. This was very controversial. Modi is a Hindu nationalist. 
Some people worry about extreme groups. They think Modi made these groups feel stronger. This includes Hindu nationalists who want to exclude people, such as Muslims, who practice other religions.  
Shylashri Shankar studies the Indian Supreme Court. She is worried by this ruling. She worries that it encourages a narrow idea of what it means to be Indian.
Some Indians do not like this ruling for other reasons. Some think it is not needed. Some think that it is not the right place for the anthem.
Other people think it is a good idea. Nitin Datar is the head of the Cinema Owners and Exhibitors Association. He is happy about the ruling. He does not think it will cause problems.
      
      