Dole Food Company sells fruits and vegetables. It wants children to eat more of these fresh foods.
To help, Dole is working with Disney.
Dole food might have some Disney characters on it. Elsa from "Frozen" is a popular character. Disney also owns "Star Wars."
Characters from "Frozen" and "Star Wars" have a new job. They will help sell fruits and vegetables. Dole will use these characters on food packaging.
Darth Vader Helped Sell Apples
Last year, Disney partnered with a different fruit company. Disney wanted to get people excited about "Star Wars: The Force Awakens." They put Darth Vader on bags of apples. He is a character in "Star Wars."
Cartoons selling food is not new. Companies use characters all the time.
Popeye the Sailor is an old cartoon. He told kids to eat spinach. 
Rob Frankel is a sales expert. He says it is easy to get kids excited about cartoons.
Companies need to get both parents and kids excited, Frankel said.
Years ago, companies focused on selling just to children.
Kids Get Excited About Cartoon Characters
General Mills is a food company. It created characters like Franken Berry and Count Chocula. They appeared on cereal boxes and on television.
Companies think cartoon characters will excite children. It will make kids want what the company is selling.
Then, if kids really want something, they will "whine and beg" for it, Frankel says. Companies want kids to beg. That way, their parents will buy what the companies are selling.
Later on, companies changed the way they sell things, Frankel said.
Companies Focus More On Health Now
Parents became more careful. They wanted to make sure their kids were eating healthy. They wanted to buy things that are good for their kids.
Food companies changed their sales plans. They started reaching out to parents. 
Companies made new packaging for their foods. They say that their foods are healthy. They wrote "sugar-free" on packages. They say their foods are natural. They wanted parents to get interested in the healthy parts of their foods. 
Disney's plan reaches both kids and parents, Frankel said. The kid is happy because the food has a Disney princess on it. The parent is happy because it is healthy, he said.
      
      