Getting a new dog? You’ll have to buy food, a collar and a leash. Those, and the cost to buy a new pup, pretty much cover it, right?
Not quite. Most new pet owners greatly underestimate what it actually costs to own a dog, say Wisconsin veterinarians Race Foster and Marty Smith. Together, they started the pet supply company Drs. Foster and Smith.
Many Expenses Associated With Owning A Dog
Besides food and trips to the veterinarian, pet owners may have to pay for fences, crates and carriers, treats, toys and poop bags. A dog may also need training classes, boarding when you travel, dog walking, dog-sitting, grooming and teeth-cleaning. Also on the list are medicines to fight fleas, ticks and heartworms. If it has not already been done, a dog will need to be spayed or neutered to prevent pregnancy. Still more costs are likely to add up from carpet cleaning, ruined furniture, scratched doors and dug-up gardens.
That’s if you have a healthy dog. Allergies, eye trouble and other problems can show up, too.
The American Pet Products Association puts the yearly cost of a dog at $1,641. The American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, ASPCA, says the yearly cost is $695. Both agree that first-year costs are higher.
Dogs From A Breeder May Cost Less Long-Term
Americans spend huge amounts of money every year on pet food, vet care and the purchase of pets, according to the American Pet Products Association. The price to adopt a rescue dog ranges from $25 to $300. To purchase a certain type of dog from a breeder, the cost is $3,000 and up.
A higher price might deliver a dog that costs less long-term. Tessa Rawitzer from Bellingham, Washington, spent $2,500 on an Australian labradoodle pup, which she named Arnold. That price included documentation that both parents were free of inherited problems. Also included in the price were neutering, shots, deworming, a crate and a manual. 
Rawitzer is hoping all that will mean fewer vet bills over the dog’s life. Her last dog, a well-loved rescue mutt named Jake, wound up costing much more. Jake was a 115-pound mix of German Shepherd, Akita and Great Dane. He tore a knee ligament while running. Then a few months later, he tore another. Surgery and follow-up care cost $8,000. Arthritis and other problems, with accompanying pain and medicine, came later.
Many Unknowns With Dogs From Shelters
Rawitzer has had dogs all her life, usually rescues. This time, too, she went to the shelter first. They had Chihuahuas and pit bulls, but their health and temperaments were unknown to the shelter owners. “I was not going to chance it,” Rawitzer said. “You don’t know what you’re getting.”
Lynn Barklage from Lake St. Louis, Missouri, got her dog, Sandy, from a pet store. At a check-up, the vet noticed something odd about Sandy’s leg. A trip to another doctor showed a bone problem. Choices presented to Barklage included surgery, which cost $1,500, or doing nothing, which could make matters worse later. “She was young; she had her whole life ahead. And we loved her. She was a great dog,” Barklage said.
Surgery was the right decision, Barklage says, but Sandy's recovery was slow and stressful. “But she was worth every penny. Dogs are. She lived six years after that,” Barklage said.
New owners often don't consider the possible cost of accidents, Rawitzer says. Arnold, her labradoodle, once lapped up a tiny, tasty piece of a barbecue-cleaning brush. An X-ray, treatment and follow-up X-ray came to $400. That accident happened during regular vet hours. The next time Arnold ate something he shouldn’t have, it was on a weekend. That trip to the emergency vet came with a $1,200 bill.
Dogs Require A Lot Of Time
Cost is not the only concern. Most new owners also don’t realize the time a dog requires, says vet Michelle Schraeder. She owns the Mountain Veterinary Hospital in Bellingham, Washington. That includes training, socialization with other dogs and people and whatever it takes to ensure the pups a good home life. 
Rawitzer, a lifelong dog owner, agrees. “You need to walk your dog. It’s excellent exercise and socialization for humans too. It’s a good way to make new friends."
Spending the time on a pet dog is worth it, Rawitzer says. "You get back a whole lot of love."
      
      