Kids, if you skip breakfast, you should stop! Many of you think the first meal of the day is not necessary, studies show. I understand your reasons.
First of all, you are tired. I mean, really, really tired. Too tired to eat, in fact. You are growing like a weed, your homework and other activities are endless, and you stay up later. The idea of eating breakfast does not sound good when you are so sleepy in the morning. You just do not feel hungry. Some of you might even feel sick just thinking about food.
Many kids see their parents drinking only coffee in the morning and skipping breakfast. This is a bad example for their children, even though parents almost always know best.
Some kids think you can stay at the same weight or even lose weight by not eating breakfast.
I understand these reasons. I was a kid once. But could you please take a few minutes to hear me out? Skipping breakfast can cause you to weigh more. It can also hurt your schoolwork. Not eating in the morning could even lead to health problems. It could hurt your heart.
Eat Breakfast, Ace That Test!
Test scores of children who do not eat breakfast are lower than those who eat a well-balanced meal. Having breakfast helps students do better in class. So if you cannot pay attention in a class, think back to what you ate that morning. If you skipped breakfast, maybe your teacher isn't so boring after all. You might just be hungry.
Breakfast Builds Up Brain And Body
You are growing fast. Your brain and your body are built out of the foods you choose to eat.
Studies show that kids who do not eat a healthy breakfast usually eat more junk food during the day. But children who have breakfast also eat more vegetables, fruits and other good foods.
Kids, look at it this way: You only get one chance to grow. Make sure you make good food choices.
Feel Glad, Not Mad
Skipping breakfast can make you tired, grouchy and unable to sit still. Some people even feel angry or get mad when they are hungry. Eating breakfast helps you feel better.
Eat Breakfast, Weigh Less
Breakfast is more important to your body than any other meal. The time between dinner and breakfast is long. So it is a good idea to eat within two hours after you wake up.
Breakfast helps you stay healthy. It also helps you not become overweight. Skipping a meal in the morning is not a good way to lose weight.
A Healthy Start On Eating Smart
Here are some ideas for breakfast on school days:
-Have healthy food on hand, such as Greek yogurt, low-sugar granola bars, hard-boiled eggs, trail mix, peanut butter and banana sandwiches, fruit or beef jerky.
-Pack breakfast to eat after your ride to school when you may feel hungrier.
-Sip a smoothie. Cold drinks might seem easier when you are too tired to chew.
-Plan the next day's breakfast the night before. This way you don't waste time in the morning. Ask your parents to help have it ready.
-Go to bed 30 minutes earlier, so you aren't as tired in the morning.
-Get up 10 minutes earlier, so your body has more time to wake up and become hungry.

Casey Seidenberg is co-founder of a nutrition education company in Washington, D.C. She wrote “The Super Food Cards."

      
      