SALT LAKE CITY, Utah — Donald Trump is the leading Republican candidate for president. He is on track to become his party's choice. A former Republican candidate said Trump would be a bad president. America would not have a safe future, he said.
Mitt Romney was the Republican presidential nominee in 2012. He lost to Barack Obama, a Democrat. Republicans and Democrats are the two main political groups. Each group selects a candidate for president. The two candidates, or nominees, run against each other in the general election in November.
On Thursday, Romney warned that any other Republican candidate would be better than Trump. Romney was speaking at the University of Utah.
Romney said that Trump does not have any good ideas for dealing with the country's problems. The only serious ones come from his Republican rivals. "One of these men should be our nominee," Romney said.  Trump is competing against Ted Cruz, Marco Rubio and John Kasich.
Men Sling Names At Each Other
Romney pleaded with Republicans to avoid Trump for the good of the country and the political party.
Trump is not an even-tempered and thoughtful leader, Romney said. He should not be given power.
Romney called Trump a "phony, a fraud." Romney added that his "promises are as worthless as a degree from Trump University."
Earlier Thursday, Trump called Romney a "stiff." He said that Romney "didn't know what he was doing" in 2012. Romney could have beat Obama but ruined it.
Trump said many people really like what he is saying and are voting for him.
Hoping To Stop Trump
Republican leaders are panicking. They do not want Trump to be the Republican choice. The billionaire businessman calls people insulting names and has extreme ideas. Trump said he wants to stop all Muslims from coming into the country. Some people have pointed out that the ban would make Muslims around the world angry at the U.S. Right now, Republicans do not have many good ideas on how to stop Trump.
Hillary Clinton is the leading Democratic candidate. Romney said if Trump becomes the Republican nominee, Clinton would win the presidency.
On Tuesday, Trump won primaries in seven states. Rival Republican Texas Senator Ted Cruz claimed three states. Florida Senator Marco Rubio won up his first victory of the 2016 race.
Despite Trump's strong night, he has not yet won the party's nomination. He still needs to win primaries in more states.
The candidates had another opportunity to tell voters about their plans for the country at a debate on Thursday. Republican candidate Ben Carson all but dropped out of the race on Wednesday. He said he would skip the debate, declaring he did not see a good way to continue running for president.
Hillary Clinton Heading For Democratic Nomination
The Democratic side has been clearer. Hillary Clinton has received many votes. Her rival, Senator Bernie Sanders, has vowed to keep up the fight, though his chances are slipping.
Romney argued that Trump's ideas would be bad for the country. The U.S. would be a poorer country. "His foreign policies would make America and the world less safe," Romney said.
The Associated Press news service asked Republican governors and senators if they would support Trump. A total of 59 of them responded. Almost half said they would not promise to support Trump in November.
Some Republicans did come up with an idea if Trump becomes the nominee. Their idea does not have much of a chance, though. They would choose another popular Republican to run for president. The candidate could not run as a Republican or a Democrat. That person would have to run as an independent, third party candidate. Former Texas Governor Rick Perry was asked if he was interested in doing this, said Jeff Miller, who managed Perry's failed Republican presidential campaign. Miller said Perry thought the idea was ridiculous.
      
      