SALT LAKE CITY, Utah — Mitt Romney ran for president in 2012. He lost to President Barack Obama. Romney said Thursday that Donald Trump would be a bad choice as a leader. America would not be safe with Trump as president.
Trump and Romney are both Republican. It is one of the two main political groups in America. The other one is the Democrats. Each group selects a person to run for president. The two people run against each other in the main election in November. Trump is leading the race to be the Republican choice.
On Thursday, Romney spoke at the University of Utah. He warned that any other Republican candidate would be better than Trump.
Other Candidates' Ideas Are Better, Romney Says
Romney said Trump does not have any good ideas. His rivals have the only serious ideas. One of these men should be the Republican choice, Romney said. Trump is competing against Ted Cruz, Marco Rubio and John Kasich.
Romney said Republicans should avoid Trump. They should not vote for him for the good of the country,
Trump has a bad temper and is not thoughtful, Romney said. He should not be given power.
Romney called Trump a "phony, a fraud." Romney added that Trump's promises are not worth anything.
Trump insulted Romney right back on Thursday. He said that Romney could have beat Obama in 2012 but ruined it. Trump said many people have voted for him. They really like what he is saying.
Republican Leaders Hope To Stop Trump
Republican leaders are afraid. They do not want Trump to be the Republican choice. Trump has called other people mean names. He has extreme ideas. Trump said he wants to stop all Muslims from coming into the country. Muslims follow the Islamic religion. Some people have pointed out that it would make Muslims all over the world angry at the U.S. Republican leaders want to stop Trump. But they do not have many good ideas on how to stop him.
Republican candidate Ben Carson dropped out of the race on Wednesday. He is not doing well. He said he did not see a good way to continue running for president.
Hillary Clinton is running for president as a Democrat. Romney said she would win if Trump was the Republican choice.
      
      