Disney's new movie "Moana" is different than other animated movies. The actors who voice the characters are from the same places as the characters they play.
"Moana" is about a young princess looking for an imaginary Pacific island. Moana is voiced by Auli'i Cravalho. Cravalho is from a real island in the Pacific Ocean — Hawaii.
Other actors' voices in the movie are from Pacific islands, too. American actor Dwayne Johnson ("The Rock") is the voice of Moana's friend Maui. Johnson's mother is from Samoa. Actors Jemaine Clement, Temuera Morrison and Rachel House are part Maori. This is a group of people native to New Zealand. And actress Nicole Scherzinger has Hawaiian roots.
"Moana" is different. Why? This is because many other animated movies don't hire actors of color to match the characters of color in the movies. Instead, they hire white actors to voice black, Asian and Hispanic characters. This is called "whitewashing."
Animated Movies Lack Actors Of Color
One example of "whitewashing" is in the new movie "Kubo and the Two Strings." The movie was made by Laika/Focus Features and is set in ancient Japan. However, many of the main voice actors are white, not Japanese. There are Japanese actors in the cast. But they voice smaller characters even though the story is set in their home country.
On Twitter, people have written about their frustration when white actors play nonwhite characters. They tweet "#CartoonsSoWhite."
One group that has spoken out is the Media Action Network for Asian Americans (MANAA). The person in charge of MANAA is Guy Aoki. He said he doesn't understand why white actors voice an entire Japanese family in "Kubo."
A Chinese-American cartoonist named Gene Luen Yang agrees with Aoki. Lalo Alcaraz, who writes and creates TV shows, said many movies in the last 10 years have cast almost all white actors.
Travis Knight works for the company that made "Kubo." He said that Laika cares about people of color.
Not New In Hollywood
All types of movies in Hollywood are blamed for "whitewashing."
For example, a white actor plays a character who is part Asian and part Hawaiian in the movie "Aloha." The movie "The Last Airbender" was set in the South Pole, but featured white actors.
No More #CartoonsSoWhite For "Moana"
"Moana" shows how Disney changed who is hired for animated movies. Disney made sure the actors are from the same places as the stories' characters.
Two movies are examples of this change. In 1992, Disney directors John Musker and Ron Clements supervised and released the movie "Aladdin." The movie had many white voice actors for the main characters, but also included an Asian-American actress named Lea Salonga. She also voiced a character in "Mulan." In addition, Disney released the 2009 movie "The Princess and the Frog." The movie featured the voices of Oprah Winfrey and Terrence Howard, who are black.
These movies are different from most other Hollywood movies and they set an example.

Michael Cavna is an American cartoonist and "Comic Riffs" columnist for The Washington Post.

      
      