 BEIRUT, Lebanon – Some Syrians began a fight against their country's government. They are called "rebels." The rebels first went into the city of Aleppo in 2012. Aleppo is Syria's biggest city. Syria is a country in the Middle East.
When they arrived in Aleppo, it was early on in the fight. It was also a high point in their action against the country's president.
The president's name is Bashar Assad. He has not treated his people well. Many Syrians have been fighting to get Assad to quit. They want a new leader. They want to have more freedoms and more say in their country's government.
There Has Been Much Fighting In Aleppo
The rebels have been fighting Assad's troops for nearly five years. Now, the rebels are not in charge of Aleppo. They were defeated by Assad's armies. Soon, Assad's government will be back in charge of Aleppo. This is important because Aleppo is the country's largest city.
This means the rebels' cause has been defeated. Now, it is certain they will not be able to make Assad step down as president. But the war is still not over. The rebels are in charge of some other parts of Syria. This land is not as important as Aleppo.
The fighting continues. Many people have gathered in a small rebel-controlled part of Aleppo. But they are in danger there. They are near the fighting and the area is very crowded.
People Want To Be Safe
Two countries, Russia and Turkey, made a plan to move the people trapped by the fighting. This plan did not work out. The Syrian government disagreed with it. If the people are not moved out, even more of them will die.
Already, about 400,000 people have been killed in the Syrian war.
People no longer care about having a new president, said Zouhir al-Shimale. He was against Assad's rule. Now, he says, people just want to escape safely.
War Ends A Dream
Last year, Russia started helping President Assad's government fight the rebels. With this help, it would not be possible for the rebels to kick out Assad.
Assad has promised to take back all land that has been lost during the war. It is uncertain if this will happen.
Aleppo will be remembered as a symbolic event. It is the end of a dream of a freer Syria. The city has been nearly destroyed.
      
      