FRESNO, Calif. — The Kashak family are refugees. They had to leave their home in the country of Syria because of the war. They arrived in the United States three months ago, and are now getting used to a new life in the city of Fresno, California. 
Thafer Kashak works as a cook at a restaurant that serves Middle Eastern food. The Middle East is made up of countries around the southern and eastern shores of the Mediterranean Sea. Syria is part of the Middle East. It has been torn apart by a war between the people and the government. Kashak has worked at the restaurant for two months. He is also helping his wife and their three children get used to Fresno. Their new life is far from Syria, and from a war that ripped their lives apart.
Americans Supporting Syrian Refugees
Last Saturday, the family served breakfast at a walk to support Syrian refugees. The Kashaks say that they are grateful for the help that their new neighbors have given them, and they want to help others. They say that their Muslim faith teaches them to take care of and respect others. Muslims follow Islam, one of the world's main religions. The family says that terrorists hurting people are not Muslims.  They are outlaws.
Money raised during the walk will go to a group that brings food and medicine to Syrian refugees. The group also helps other people from the Middle East and Europe. It helps anyone who is forced to leave home.
The Kashak family is among about 10,000 people in the U.S. who had to leave Syria because of the war. Aimee Abu-Shamsieh helped set up the fundraiser. She says that the pre-war population of Syria was about 23 million. It is now about half that.
The Kashaks left Syria in 2012. Before the war, the family lived a quiet life. Thafer Kashak ran a candy shop and factory.
The family ended up in a refugee camp on the border of the countries of Jordan and Syria. They lived in a tent in the desert without running water for a few days. Then, relatives living in a nearby city came to get them. However, camp guards did not let the family leave, so they escaped into Jordan.
In Jordan, Syrian refugees were not allowed to work, so Kashak had to bake sweets illegally. Finally, he was able to take his family to the U.S.  Kashak says getting into the U.S. took almost two years. When they arrived, they settled in Fresno where the family had a relative.
White House Will Accept More Refugees
Last week, the White House announced that the U.S. will accept more refugees. They will be from countries around the world. The increase will happen next year, and will raise the number from 85,000 allowed in 2016, to 110,000. 
Tim Kutzmark gives sermons, or lessons, at the Unitarian Universalist Church in Fresno. He says that the U.S. should accept even more refugees. “Many members of our church are concerned that such a small amount of Syrian refugees are being allowed to enter this country,” Kutzmark says. 
He explains that the fundraising walk is a way for the people of Fresno to do something to help. Kutzmark says that the walk is a way of showing that all people have worth. They deserve to be treated with fairness, kindness and respect. He says, "My heart breaks each time I see a photo of a frightened Syrian family fleeing for their lives.”
Jim Grant works for the Catholic church in Fresno. He says Pope Francis is urging people to help refugees. Grant says, “The pope sees that refugees are not a national threat. They are a benefit, and if we could please take care of them, that could end terrorism."
Reza Nekumanesh works for the Islamic Cultural Center of Fresno. He says, "Families are seeking safe haven from war and terror, and because of ignorance and a supposed fear of importing terrorism, the families become targets of suspicion and hatred."
      
      