ATLANTA, Ga. — In a Coca-Cola ad, two superheroes fight for a tiny can of soda. Coke’s ad showed Ant-Man and The Incredible Hulk battling for a mini-can of soda. Ant-Man is tiny, and the Incredible Hulk is huge.
They both feel full from the same tiny soda.
The ad did not mention the price. It turns out that tiny Coke cans are more expensive than a regular-size Coke. 
Fewer people drink soda nowadays. To try and get them interested, Coke has been selling soda in smaller cans. But, by the ounce, these mini-cans are more expensive than regular-sized bottles. 

People Like Smaller Bottles Just As Much
For years, people have wondered if Coke is making Americans fatter. To try and fight against this idea, Coke decided to start selling its soda in smaller bottles and cans seven years ago. The mini-cans and bottles were a hit for Coke. More and more people started buying them. 
The smaller cans have become just as popular as the regular cans. Now, several different brands of soda owned by Coca-Cola come in small cans. They include Sprite, Fanta Orange soda and Seagram’s Ginger Ale.
Sandy Douglas is in charge of Coca-Cola in North America. He says the mini-cans are also making the company a lot of money. Douglas said the mini-cans have less soda, but they are more expensive than a regular can. A regular can of Coke, for instance, costs 31 cents. But a mini Coke sells for 40 cents.
The people who own the company are very impressed. The mini-bottles are making the company more money. Not everyone thinks this is a good thing.
Mini-Bottles Make For A Treat
Michael Jacobson is a health expert. He admits the smaller bottles are not as bad for people's health. There is a lower risk of becoming overweight or getting rotten teeth from a Coke mini because it comes in a smaller package. He asked Coke and Pepsi to shrink the size of even bigger bottles and cans. 
Still, he worries some people who do not drink sodas may be tempted to give the mini-can a try because of its size. He worries the mini-can might make more people start drinking soda. 
Soft drinks have become less popular in North America for the past 10 years. Americans have started to drink more tea, coffee and water instead of soda. Half of all grown-ups avoid all soft drinks.  
Many cities and states are concerned about the effects of soda on people's health. They have tried to get soda companies to pay higher taxes or provide smaller sizes.
Last year, many people were upset with Coke. A group of scientists said then that Coke was not the reason people were getting fatter. The scientists said people were getting fatter because they were not exercising enough. Some newspapers discovered that Coke was paying the scientists to say that. 
Willing To Spend More Money
The mini-cans have helped Coke get past that. Through its mini-cans, Coke has found a way to make money even though fewer people drink soda. Duane Stanford writes about soda for a magazine. He says people will pay more for smaller bottles. Small bottles are easier to drink and carry around. Small bottles also let people control how much soda you drink. The mini-cans are also great for people who drink soft drinks as a treat, Stanford said.
Douglas said everyone likes the small bottles, especially moms and people with more money.
“Moms want to treat their kids, but they don’t want them to have too much,” he said. “They want to be in control, and these packages give them control.”
      
      