FRESNO, California — A little-known farm sits on school land in Fresno, California. It is inspiring minds and growing healthy food.
Harvest Fields Organic Farm launched two years ago at Fresno Adventist Academy. The farm grows navel oranges, vegetables and other plants for food. Like other organic farms, Harvest Fields uses only natural farming materials. It’s also home to a flock of 130 chickens. It has four greenhouses to grow plants in.
It’s still growing.
The school did not use its football field much. It has been plowed under and is now being prepared to grow potatoes. Part of the field has been repurposed as a weather station.
Farms And Schools Working Together
The farm is the first of its kind in Fresno. Across the country, farms and schools are working together more closely. 
The farm sells what it harvests to about 130 customers. Each customer receives a box of fresh fruits and vegetables every week.
Along with his wife and a small team, David Obermiller runs Harvest Fields Organic Farm. The Obermillers and the school’s teachers use the farm as an outdoor classroom. The school has 211 students from kindergarten to 12th grade.
At this school, students really get their hands dirty.
First Tastes Of Radish And Basil
Fourth-grade students ran excitedly across the school's grounds to the farm’s greenhouses. The students helped plant lettuce seeds in seedling containers. Once sprouted, the seedlings will be replanted. Then, they will be used to grow more lettuce. Students also plucked radishes from the ground. They will share them with their families.
Timothy Hyde runs the greenhouse. The homework he assigned the students was to taste the vegetables they picked and tell him what they thought.
Part of what the students learn is how food is grown. Perhaps more importantly, they learn what it tastes like. For some, it’s the first time they’ve eaten a radish or nibbled on a basil leaf.
“I didn’t know what basil was when I first saw it,” says Isabella Riley. “It tasted pretty good.”
Learning Where Food Comes From
Principal Marla Rasmussen said it’s important for children to take part in farming. It's also important for children to know they need to eat fruits and vegetables to be healthy. She also wants students to learn that food doesn't just come from the store. It has to be grown and harvested.
Obermiller came from an organic farm in Arizona. He came to Fresno to start this farm. He said it is important that students get to taste the food that they are helping to grow. He said they are trying to reconnect kids to farming. He wants them to understand what good food tastes like.
The farm also welcomes students from other schools. A group of about 130 students from William Saroyan Elementary will be touring the farm soon.
Obermiller is also helping a downtown Fresno school start its own city farm.
“I really believe kids learn better when they know the reason for what they are learning,” Obermiller says.
      
      