HAVANA, Cuba — Cuba is an island near Florida. Cuba and America used to be enemies. President Barack Obama went to Cuba this week. It was the first visit by an American president in many years.
Raul Castro is the president of Cuba. He and Obama met. They said the two countries should be friends. They did not agree on much else. 
U.S. presidents usually talk to news reporters. It is not normal in Cuba. Castro does not like answering questions from reporters. Usually, he only answers if he feels like it. On Monday Castro answered some questions. His answers were not open and honest. Yet Cubans were surprised. They hoped Cuba was changing.
Question Annoys Castro
An American reporter asked Castro about prisoners. They are in jail for speaking against the government. First Castro said he could not hear the question. Then he asked whether it was for him or Obama. Finally he said he did not know of anyone. He told the reporter to give him names. Castro said they would be let go that day.
Amnesty International is a human rights group. Amnesty said it did not know of any people in Cuban jails for speaking against the government. This shows that Cuba has changed. It is getting better for people's freedoms.
Marlene Pino lives in Cuba. She never thought she would see Castro answer these questions. Ricardo Herrera also lives in Cuba. He said it was like something in a movie. He is surprised how his country is changing.
In Cuba, Too Few Freedoms
Castro said the U.S. has to change. It has a Navy base in Cuba. U.S. soldiers are at the Navy base. Castro said the U.S. must give the base back to Cuba. 
Castro also wants more trade between the U.S. Trade is selling and buying between countries. Castro wants the U.S. to sell to Cuba.  He wants the U.S. to buy Cuban things. American lawmakers do not allow this. They want to force Cuba to be more free. Then once Cuba changes its government, lawmakers would allow for trade. 
Castro has made big changes in Cuba. It has made life easier for Cubans. Cubans can now open their own businesses. People can use cellphones and the Internet.
Yet Castro has not changed Cuba's government. There are not many freedoms. People cannot say what they want. They cannot write what they want. They cannot protest against the government.
Obama said Cuba needs to change. If it does not, there will still be problems between the two countries.
      
      