People often compete against each other. They play against each other in sports. They try to get more A's than anyone else in school.
Competition can make people do great things. It also makes them behave badly. Some people decide the easiest way to win is to cheat. They act unfairly or lie.
What about winning itself, though. Could winning make people more likely to cheat? 
Scientists Amos Schurr and Ilana Ritov tried to answer that question.
The two released a report this week. It told the world what they found out.
"Winning" Can Change How People Act
Schurr and Ritov ran several tests to discover what happens when people win competitions. They wanted to see if winning changes people. 
First, they had groups of students compete against each other. The students were told to say how many signs were flashing across a computer screen. Those who were closest to the right answer won a prize. 
The winners were actually picked by chance. They had not really beaten other students, but they believed they had.
The students were then given something else to do. 
Game Tested If Kids Were Honest
First, they were split into pairs. One student in each pair was given two dice. Each of the two dice had six sides. Each side had a number of dots on it, from 1 to 6.
The student with the dice was supposed to roll them. A roll of the dice gives a number between 2 and 12. 
The other student was told just to watch. Each had a chance to win part of some money. 
Only the student who rolled the dice could see how the roll turned out. It was up to him to tell the truth. The higher the number, the more money he would get. The other student got whatever was left over.
Some Students Lied About Dice
Something interesting happened. The students who thought they won the first competition cheated. They said they got a higher number on the dice than they really did. The other students did not cheat.
What is it about winning that makes people cheat?
Scientist Dacher Keltner thinks he knows the answer. When we win a competition we start to feel better than other people, he says. We begin to think we have the right to do whatever we want. Suddenly cheating seems just fine.
Maybe we should all think less about winning. Doing a good job should be enough.
Maybe if more people thought that way there would be less cheating.
      
      