Americans throw away almost as much food as they eat. They will not eat food that does not look perfect. This waste can leave people hungry. It can also harm the Earth.
Some fruits and vegetables are never picked. Other food is taken from the field to the landfill. This happens if the food does not look pretty enough, farmers and officials said.
If food is not perfect, people throw it away, Jay Johnson said. He ships fruit and vegetables from North Carolina and Florida. 
Food is also lost in fields, stores and refrigerators.
Thrown Away Even If They Are Safe To Eat
Nearly half of all fruit and vegetables are thrown out, experts say. They are wasted by stores and by people. Vegetables are left in the field to save on the cost of picking them. They are left to rot in a warehouse. They are wasted even if they are safe to eat. 
Sometimes the food is fed to cattle, said Wayde Kirschenman. His family grows food in California.
Dark cauliflower was plowed over in the field. Boxes of oranges were sent to a landfill. In June, Kirschenman fed many of his watermelons to cows.
Around the world, about one-third of food is wasted.
Cut Food Waste In Half
President Barack Obama wants to cut food waste in half. Farmers and others have also said they will try to stop waste.
“There are a lot of people who are hungry,” said Shenggen Fan. He is the head of a research group in Washington, D.C. “That is why food waste ... matters.”
According to the U.S. government, food is the most common thing thrown in the dump. Food dumps makes gas that can harm the Earth. 
The Vegetables Were Perfect Except For Small Scratches
In May, Johnson picked squash in Florida. The vegetables were perfect except for small scratches. He said no one bought them. He even tried to sell them for a low price.
Roni Neff runs a food program in Baltimore. Stores think nobody will buy ugly food, she said. That is why they will not buy it either.
Some stores are starting to sell ugly food. 
Farmers and truckers said some stores were not being fair. A trucker said his vegetables looked great. Still, a store turned them down because their sales were slow.
      
      