LAREDO, Texas — There is a big party in Laredo, Texas, every year. It is a fancy dance called a ball. A group called The Society of Martha Washington is in charge of the ball. 
Thirteen girls are invited to be in the ball. They are called debutantes, or debs. They are teenagers. The ball lets people know that they are almost adults. Most of the debs are Latinas. Their families came from Latin America. The town of Laredo is near Mexico.
One Martha, One George
The girls wear long, pretty dresses. They are called gowns. They look like dresses worn 250 years ago. That was during the American Revolution. Back then, 13 American Colonies wanted to be free from England.
The ball is named for Martha Washington. She was the wife of George Washington. He was the first U.S. president. Every year, a girl dresses like Martha. One boy dresses like George Washington.
Linda Leyendecker Gutierrez makes most of the gowns. Linda was a deb. Her family has been part of the ball for more than 100 years.
Katie's Special Dress
Linda has made gowns for 500 girls. One day, she helped Katie Beckelhymer. Linda made sure Katie's dress fit perfectly.
Katie is 17. She stood still. Two helpers tied a corset around Katie's waist. It made her look thin. Then they put a frilly white skirt called a petticoat on her. Finally, they helped Katie put on her dress.
Katie’s grandmother watched. She said the dress was beautiful. It looked like art. 
The ball was two weeks away. Linda bent down. She fluffed some lace at the bottom of the dress.
She worried that the dress was too short. Linda spoke in Spanish. She wore big black glasses. She asked her helpers to tug the skirt down.
Girls Get Ready For The Ball
Linda is 73 years old. She is very fit. She can drop down and crawl under the gowns. Linda loves working on the dresses.
The girls take classes. They learn how to dance, walk and bow. They learn how to go up and down stairs without falling. This is hard to do in big dresses. The dresses weigh almost as much as the girls do.
Before the ball, the debs are in a parade. They ride on floats. The debs might lift their skirts. They show off funny shoes. Some debs wear slippers. Others wear cowgirl boots. The crowd cheers and claps.
      
      