JOHANNESBURG, South Africa — Vietnam has become the biggest center in the world for sales of horns and other body parts of the rhinoceros. Buying and selling these items is against the law, but it continues. 
Rhinos are in danger of dying out because they are hunted. Much of the hunting is also against the law. Hunters in South Africa kill roughly one rhino every eight hours.
About 1,300 rhinos are killed across Africa each year. That number is up from just 100 in 2008. The animals are hunted for their horns. Demand for rhino horn has increased greatly in recent years, especially in parts of Asia, where some believe ground-up horns can cure illness.
Studies by wildlife trade experts show that most rhino horn is smuggled into Vietnam. However, Vietnam has not done much to stop this. It has not started even one successful court case against these traders.
Countries Need To Enforce Wildlife Bans
The Convention on Trade in Endangered Species, called CITES, is meeting this week in South Africa. This organization sets global rules about the trade of wildlife products. CITES has given Vietnam a warning. It says the country needs to do more to follow the rules on the rhino horn trade.
The warning suggests that trade limits, or sanctions, could begin next year. A country hit by trade limits loses business with other countries.  
CITES can make it illegal to sell certain wildlife products. Still, it needs its member countries to carry out these bans and enforce the laws.
“It’s beginning to look like the only way they will take it seriously is sanctions,” said Colman O’Criodain. He works for the World Wildlife Fund. He says that Vietnam had resisted action on wildlife product sales for years.
Africa Is Quickly Losing Its Rhinos
In Kruger National Park in South Africa, the scene is ugly. On average, 12 crime gangs are working at any one time in the park, South African police say. Only 25,000 rhinos remain in Africa, most of them in South Africa. But South Africa has lost some 6,000 since 2007. At least 1,175 rhinos were illegally killed last year.
Vietnam has taken some steps to follow CITES's rules and other agreements. 
In 2012, Hanoi, the capital of Vietnam, agreed to work with South Africa to control the trade in rhino horn. In 2014, it signed the London Declaration on wildlife trade. In all, 46 countries signed up. The declaration said countries would carry out laws against wildlife hunting. Vietnam also has changed its own laws to make selling some wildlife products a crime.
However, more demand for these products has stopped Vietnam from enforcing the laws, said Leigh Henry of the World Wildlife Fund. This group works with CITES on rhino protection.
Secret Study Makes An Alarming Find
The United States and Britain are members of CITES. Both countries support taking action to make Vietnam follow the rules, Henry said. 
Pressure on Vietnam increased this year after a secret study by the Wildlife Justice Commission (WJC). The study showed that the village of Nhi Khe is a big sales center for wildlife products. 
In Nhi Khe, the WJC found the horns of 573 rhinos. They also found items from 907 elephants, 225 tigers, and other animals. The products were valued at more than $53 million.
The people doing the study pretended to be customers. They saw rhino horns and tiger bones piled onto scales, and rooms filled with elephant tusks, one of them said. 
A secret video shot by the group shows a Nhi Khe shop. Customers there handle bracelets and necklaces made of rhino horn. Buyers from China are the village's main customers.
Who Are Local Police Protecting?
WJC's leader is a lawyer named Olivia Swaak-Goldman. She said the group was told by people in the village that police were given money to ignore the animal trade.
The people were breaking the law, but they felt protected by police, Swaak-Goldman said.
The group gave a 5,000-page report on Nhi Khe to the Vietnamese government in January. The report included information against 51 traders believed to be breaking the law. Yet the government has taken no action against those who were named.
      
      