Many people want Latin American history to be taught more in schools. In Texas, they will get their wish. Though it is not quite what they wanted. 
The Texas State Board of Education helps to pick textbooks for schools. They approved adding Mexican-American studies textbooks last year. A book about Mexican-Americans has been suggested. The book is called "Mexican American Heritage." Many people are already angry about what is in the book.
Battles Over Texas Textbooks
People have been upset about Texas textbooks before. Many people do not like how the books talk about race and religion. Many Texans are very conservative. They believe in traditional values. They do not like it when government tells businesses what to do.
Not every other state agrees with Texas. Yet Texas has a lot of power with schools. It is a huge state. It buys a lot of textbooks. Because of this, Texas can change what books are offered across the country.
People Say The Book Is Unfair
Many people believe the new textbook is misleading and unfair. One person who thinks this is Tony Diaz. He is a radio host and professor. He says the new textbook is hurtful.
Many Latinos such as Diaz did not like the way Chicanos were described. Chicano is another name for Mexican-American. The Chicano movement helped to give more power to Mexican-Americans in the 1960s. During this time, many Mexican-Americans were farmworkers. They worked long hours. They were treated very badly.
The movement was led by Cesar Chavez. It was meant to help these farmworkers. It also tried to build pride among Mexican-Americans. The textbook describes Chicanos as being against America. It also says Mexican pride is dividing the country. 
The book also ties Mexican-Americans to people who come to the United States without permission. It connects them with other crimes, too.
Schools Have Choices
The book was made by a company owned by Cynthia Dunbar. She used to be on the Texas State Board of Education. Dunbar is known for having strong ideas. 
Anyone can send in a book to be added to the teaching list. Many Texas teachers did not know that the board was looking for Mexican-American studies books. The board says it did not do anything unusual when asking for people to send in books.
Books on the list do not need to be used in class. Some schools also use books that have not been approved by the board.
      
      