SEATTLE, Wash. — Michael Stocker is a master animator at the computer animation film studio Pixar. His trade is a highly demanding one. It requires the production of countless slightly different images, which create the appearance of motion when shown together in rapid order.
Animation is not just a technical skill — it is also an art.
“Animators are actors,” said Stocker, who most recently worked on “Finding Dory,” the follow-up to the hit animated film “Finding Nemo.” “We’re delivering a performance.”
Bringing Blue Tang Dory Back To Life
Stocker has worked at Pixar for 13 years, the last 3 1/2 of which were spent as animation supervisor for “Finding Dory.” For that film, he led a team of about 70 animators to bring to life the story of the forgetful blue tang fish Dory. As in “Finding Nemo,” Dory is voiced by actress and talk-show host Ellen DeGeneres.
It was a long process, which they began by creating a puppet or model for each character. The puppets were not puppets in the usual sense, though. They were three-dimensional images created on computer screens. 
For many of the characters, Stocker and the others were not exactly starting from scratch: Dory and her friends Marlin and Nemo are well-known from the original 2003 film "Finding Nemo." However, Stocker said, they could not simply reuse old models, because "the technology had all changed.”
“To rebuild Dory was super-hard because, as soon as you move something, that’s not Dory. People are so attached to that character, they knew instantly that it wasn’t the same.”
Eight-Legged Challenges
Once the puppets were created, work on movement and scenes began. It was a collaborative process, Stocker said, because he and his team had to follow the vision of directors Andrew Stanton and Angus MacLane, and had to work around the voice actors' already-recorded dialogue. 
One of the biggest challenges was creating Pixar’s first octopus, the grumpy Hank, who helps Dory escape from a California aquarium.
“We wanted to do a realistic octopus,” Stocker said. At first it was very difficult to figure out just how an octopus moves — all those legs are a challenge for an animator. Stocker and his team spent some time at the Monterey Bay Aquarium, where they studied the way the octopus body works and held some of the animals, who turned out to be surprisingly friendly. “They purr like a cat!” Stocker said. The visits were helpful, but Hank still took two years to build.
The Rabbit Sparks An Idea
Before becoming an animator, Stocker worked for airplane manufacturer Boeing and for the Seattle design firm Teague. The entire time he kept thinking back to a film class he took while a student at Spokane Falls Community College. Years later, he said, he was sitting in his living room and a commercial for the animated film “Who Framed Roger Rabbit” came on television. “I just thought, animation  — that’s it, exactly!”
Moving south, he studied at the California Institute of the Arts and then began his career in hand-drawn animation at Disney with “The Lion King” his first credit. After 10 years, he was offered a job at Pixar and, eager to learn about computer animation, he decided to accept. “I loved the movies they were making, and I wanted to learn how to use the computer from them,” he said. “It was perfect timing.”
“Finding Nemo” was in the middle of production when Stocker first began working at Pixar. “I was a fan of it, and for my kids, it was their first movie,” he said. “We’re finding out how many people love that first movie. There’s something about that world people want to live in for an hour and a half — being underwater in that environment, it’s beautiful.
“We’re making a different movie, but we needed to make sure that we captured that feeling.”
      
      