Needles have been scaring patients at doctor's offices since the 1850s. In the next 10 years, the needle could be history. Getting a vaccine could soon be pain-free. 
Scientist Mark Kendall created the needle-free Nanopatch. It is tinier than a postage stamp. Its small size could mean fewer deaths around the world from diseases that can easily be spread from person to person. These diseases kill millions of people each year.  
Many vaccines need to be refrigerated to keep the medicine useful. The Nanopatch needs no refrigeration. It is made with thousands of tiny spikes. The spikes are dry-coated with vaccine. That is important for countries that do not have enough refrigerators to keep medications cold.
The Nanopatch attaches to the skin and uses springs to push medication into cells just below the skin. Needles are much less direct, Kendall says. They inject medicine into muscle. Needles can also hurt patients and put health-care workers at risk of catching disease.
He Found A Way To Beat Old Technology
“Old technology may be hard to beat, but we think we have something that can finally beat old technology,” says Kendall.
He came up with the Nanopatch in 2004 when he was a scientist at Oxford University. He wants to test it in the South Pacific island country of Papua New Guinea. The country has few doctors or preventative medicine. 
“It’s a great place [for a] test case — a country the size of France that has only 800 refrigerators, many not working," says Kendall. 
Kendall founded the company Vaxxas. It has received millions of dollars in funding to make medicine. Vaxxas is hoping to work with big companies that sell medicines all over the world. It wants to work with the World Health Organization (WHO) as well. The WHO will study a new type of polio vaccine in 2017. Polio is a dangerous disease that can make muscles stop working and can lead to death.
Years Before Nanopatch Will Be Ready
Kendall is now a professor at the University of Queensland in Australia. Earlier this year, his team tested a polio vaccine in rats. The tests found the Nanopatch worked very well using much less medicine than a regular vaccine.
Getting new medicines to patients takes years of study. It also requires a lot of funding. David Hoey is Vaxxas' CEO. He says the company is hoping to be able to sell the Nanopatch in the United States. For that to happen, scientists must ensure the Nanopatch is safe. 
More studies are needed, though. Hoey says it could take 5 to 7 years. 
The Nanopatch started out as a doodle on a notepad. Kendall says he realized even then that his invention would take at least 10 years to get to patients.
“Making something that could make a difference to millions of people is a wonderful feeling — there's nothing else I'd rather be doing,’’ he says.
      
      