The vast majority of young Arabs do not support Islamic State (IS), according to the 2016 Arab Youth Survey. The poll also found that about the same number of young Arabs think IS will fail to make itself into an Islamic state. IS is an extremist group with the name abbreviating the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria. It is also called ISIS or ISIL.
IS is fighting to create a country, or an Islamic state, under the rule of an Islamic religious leader called a caliph. Even if IS stopped being so violent, only 13 percent of Arab youths in the survey said they could imagine themselves supporting the extremist group. That's down from 19 percent in last year's survey. And this year, 50 percent of Arab youths -- up from 37 percent last year -- saw IS as the biggest problem facing the Middle East.
For this survey, 3,500 Arab men and women in the Middle East and North Africa were interviewed during the first few months of 2016. The men and women were between 18 and 24 years old, and the interviews were completed in Arabic and English. In its eighth year, the survey provides a snapshot of the hopes and beliefs of 200 million people. 
More Arab Teens Unemployed
The poll responses show mounting concern across the region. A lack of jobs and opportunities for young Arabs was cited as the main reason that young people turned to terrorist organizations. In eight of the 16 countries surveyed, employment problems were a bigger pull factor for IS than extreme religious views.
The Arab world has the highest youth unemployment on the planet, according to the World Bank. About 1 in 4 15- to 24-year-olds are jobless, and the International Labour Organisation believes up to 75 million young people are without a job in Arab countries.
Only 22 percent cited lack of democracy as the biggest obstacle in the Middle East. Still, two-thirds of young Arabs (67 percent) wanted their leaders to do more to improve their personal freedoms and the human rights of citizens, particularly women.
Preferring Stable Government Over Democracy
In 2011, a series of pro-democratic uprisings, collectively known as the Arab Spring, rocked the region. Now five years later, the survey found that most young people would prefer to have a stable government more than a democracy. 
Optimism that the region would be better off in the wake of the Arab Spring uprisings has been steadily declining. In 2016, only 36 percent of young people said they felt the Arab world was in better shape following the upheaval, down from 72 percent in 2012. This year, the majority (53 percent) agreed that maintaining a stable government was more important than promoting democracy (28 percent). Whereas five years ago, 92 percent of Arab youth said “living in a democracy” was their most cherished wish.
The survey also found that 47 percent of Arab youths believed Sunni-Shia relations were deteriorating. Sunni and Shia are two sects of Islam with fundamentally conflicting religious beliefs. The two groups split off from each other in the 7th century, and now worldwide, about 85 percent of Muslims are Sunni and 15 percent are Shia. Many conflicts in the Middle East can be traced back to Sunni and Shia clashes. 
Religion Carries Too Much Influence
In fact, the poll found that 52 percent of Arab youths felt religion played too big a role in the region. Sunni Saudi Arabia and Shia Iran have enormous power in the Middle East. Right now, they are on opposite sides of the wars in Syria and Yemen.
Digging deeper into the Syrian civil war, 39 percent of Arab youth viewed the bloody conflict as merely a stage that outside regional and global powers had chosen for a larger war. Twenty-nine percent saw the Syrian civil war as a revolution against the Shia Bashar al-Assad regime. Twenty-two percent believed it was a civil war among Syrians.
Nearly half of those polled supported the 2015 international nuclear deal that halted Iran from building nuclear weapons. Divisions were evident in Arab youth thoughts towards the U.S., with 63 percent considering it an ally and 32 percent as an enemy.
The survey also found that young Arabs viewed the United Arab Emirates (UAE) as a “model country." The UAE is a collection of hereditary sheikhdoms without any democratically elected representatives. (A sheikhdom is a geographic area led by a sheikh, which is an Arab title for a ruler.)  The UAE is governed by a president, who is chosen by the sheikhs, and a prime minister, who is chosen by the president. 
What's Their Favorite Country? United Arab Emirates
Nearly 1 in 4 (22 percent) cited the UAE as the country they would most like to live in. A similar number said it is the nation they would most like their own country to resemble (23 percent). International human rights groups regularly highlight issues within the UAE, but the Arab youths were not asked about that. 
The survey found 66 percent of Arab youth were increasingly concerned about falling oil prices. Many Middle Eastern countries rely on oil reserves to support their economy. Since 2014, the price per barrel of oil has fallen from around $100 to $30. Saudi Arabia, the world’s largest oil producer, is struggling to undertake large-scale economic reforms in response.
More young Arabs get their daily news online than from TV or print media, according to the survey. Thirty-two percent said they get their daily news online, 29 percent watch TV news and just 7 percent read newspapers daily. 
• The international polling firm Penn Schoen Berland conducted the Arab Youth Survey 2016. Respondents are from Algeria, Bahrain, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Morocco, Oman, Palestine, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Tunisia, UAE and Yemen.
      
      