Ethan Brown started his company, Beyond Meat, after one too many meals with meat-eating co-workers. He was an environmentalist working in the clean energy field, and often had dinners with people who would eat beef while worrying about the planet. 
"We would go to conferences and sit there wringing our hands over all these issues," Brown said. He told a science journal that at those same dinners "people would order huge steaks." Brown had been a vegetarian since he was 18. The idea of protecting the environment while eating meat seemed inconsistent to him.
Brown left his job in 2009 to found Beyond Meat, a company based on the ideas of food scientist Fu-hung Hsieh. The scientist was a pioneer in making vegetable protein taste more like real flesh.
Before Beyond Burger, There Was Beyond Chicken
Beyond Chicken strips were the first big success for Beyond Meat. The strips were designed to taste better than tofu dogs and veggie burgers. Food Network star Alton Brown watched the making of the strips at Beyond Meat's factory in Columbia, Missouri. "It's more like meat than anything I've ever seen that wasn't meat," he said.
Beyond Meat's latest invention is the Beyond Burger. The company says the burger is the most meatlike non-meat yet. It was popular from the moment it went on sale at a Whole Foods in Boulder, Colorado. The New York Times said it was the best substitute animal protein, a plant burger on which a human carnivore would happily snack.
A Beyond Burger patty contains 20 grams of vegetable protein, mostly from peas. It does not have any soybeans or gluten, a substance in wheat and flour that makes dough elastic. The company says a Beyond Burger does bleed, though its "blood" is beet juice. The Beyond Burger looks, smells and feels like meat.
A Fat Lot Of Good
It was not easy to make. Plants are not swirled with fat, and they do not have stretchy connective tissues. Even lab-grown beef patties have struggled to copy animal meat. It was up to researchers like scientist Joseph D. Puglisi to figure out how to deposit plant fat in layers. "We were able to get fat distributed throughout a patty, but in meat, fat is distributed in sheets," he says.
How to replicate meaty layers with plant matter is one of Beyond Meat's biggest secrets. Biz Stone is a Beyond Meat backer, and he describes the company's fake chicken as feeling like meat in the mouth. "It feels fatty and muscly and like it's not good for you when you're chewing it," Stone says. "For a longtime vegan, it's a little bit freaky."
How closely the fake chicken, without any other ingredients, looks and tastes like the real bird is a matter of debate. When tucked in a wrap, however, the game seems to change. Beyond Meat even fooled a New York Times food writer in a taste test.
Give Peas A Chance
This may seem like a lot of excitement over mashed peas, but it's not for some people. Finding tasty meat alternatives is important to those who care about animal welfare, human health and the environment. Livestock is a significant contributor of the greenhouse gas methane. Production of this gas contributes to global warming. Furthermore, crops take up about half as much space as livestock. A study in a science journal concluded that a global vegetarian diet would be the best way to feed 2050's estimated population, without adding farmland.
Livestock farms hurt human health too. Due to antibiotic use in livestock, the government estimates that 20 percent of antibiotic-resistant infections come from food. The demand for meat produced cheaply and quickly may also lead to poor working conditions. A worker in the poultry industry told a human rights group that he had to wear diapers on the job because bathroom breaks were forbidden.
Move Over. There's A New Patty Around
Brown said his goal with the Beyond Burger is to make people think of plant protein as meat. He wants Whole Foods to sell the vegetable patties alongside animal meat. Online, some vegetarians said they were not comfortable with selling the Beyond Burger right next to real hamburger patties. The company defended its request for the meat aisle. It called the plan the "opening shot in our bid to transform the meat case into the protein case."
If such a complete transformation is the goal, the company will need to send in reinforcement burgers. The first batch sold out in an hour. Beyond Meat says it plans to expand to Denver, Colorado; Washington, D.C.; and beyond.
      
      