Elie Wiesel, who kept the memory of the Holocaust alive, died July 2 at his home in New York. He was 87 years old.
Millions around the world have read "Night." His book is about living through the  Holocaust as a teenager. During World War II, Germany tried to destroy the Jewish people. They killed and imprisoned millions of them in concentration camps. Wiesel won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1986 for speaking out against unfairness and violence around the world. Presidents invited him to the White House to discuss human rights problems. The chairman of the Norwegian Nobel Committee called him a "messenger to mankind."
A Voice For Those Who Lost Theirs
In 1945, he was freed from Buchenwald concentration camp. He was starving and  near death. At the time, no one knew how important he would be in the world. At the time, few people who lived through the Holocaust spoke openly about it, and those who did often felt ignored. Wiesel helped force the world to face the Holocaust.
"When the last survivor dies, so will the last voice, who can say 'This is my story; I was there,'" said Holocaust scholar Deborah Lipstadt. "But in Elie Wiesel, we had that voice with a megaphone that wasn't matched by anyone else."
To forget the Holocaust, Wiesel always said, would be to kill the victims a second time.
"Elie Wiesel was one of the great moral voices of our time, and in many ways, the conscience of the world," President Barack Obama said. He described Wiesel as "a dear friend."
Jewish issues were close to his heart, but other groups were just as important, he said. He spoke out on behalf of Jews in the Soviet Union, Cambodians and the Kurds, among other populations. He said that the United States must become involved when evil comes to power.
Surviving The Holocaust
Eliezer Wiesel was born September 30, 1928, in Sighet, a town in modern-day Romania.
Wiesel grew up in a close, religious Jewish family, the only son of a grocer, Shlomo, and his wife, Sarah. Both his parents and a younger sister were killed in the Holocaust.
When Wiesel was 15 years old, the Nazis sent him to Auschwitz, a concentration camp in Poland. He said that when he turned 18, he wasn't really 18. The camps had turned him into an old man.
An Orphan In France
After his liberation from Buchenwald, another camp, Wiesel found himself on a train of orphans that ended up in France. His two older sisters had survived. The siblings were united after one of the girls, also living in France, spotted her brother's face in a newspaper.
Wiesel was in his 20s when he first wrote "Night." He had a hard time getting it published. The world did not want to hear about the Holocaust.
Wiesel believed strongly that it is important to remember evil to make sure it will not happen again. 
Immigration To The United States
In 1956, he immigrated to the United States. He became an American citizen, and first worked for a Jewish newspaper and then taught for more than 30 years at Boston University. In 1969, he married Marion Erster Rose, who also survived the Holocaust. They had a son.
He wrote more than 40 works of literature, including novels, plays and essays. They were based on the Jewish ideas and stories he learned first from his grandfather and rabbis in Sighet.
Wiesel often said that he found hope in the young, in both his students and his own child.
A Lot To Remember
In his talks, he often looked small and weak. He would say that he did not want to live long enough to become the last Holocaust survivor.
"Only God and God alone can and must remember everything," he said.
      
      