With Stephen Curry out of the running for a spot on the U.S. Olympic team, the other superstar in the NBA Finals, LeBron James, is getting all the attention.
His decision could determine just how powerful the U.S. team is at the upcoming Olympic Games in Rio de Janeiro. The team's roster is almost complete, nearly three weeks before the deadline, but the process is on hold until James makes up his mind.
"That's an important decision," USA Basketball chairman Jerry Colangelo said Monday.
Colangelo added that there are realistically only 14 or 15 players still under consideration for the 12 spots. The final list will depend on James' decision.
"If he doesn't play, then we have to tweak it," Colangelo said in a phone interview.
Quick Decision Due After NBA Finals
The answer won't come until after the finals. If James' NBA team, the Cleveland Cavaliers, can make it a long series against the Golden State Warriors, Team USA won't have long to react.
Game 7 would be June 19, and USA Basketball is planning to announce the team June 27. So Colangelo said Monday he's working on two rosters, one with James and one without.
The original 31-player list features plenty of enticing choices at forward. Kevin Durant, Kawhi Leonard, Carmelo Anthony, Paul George, Draymond Green and Kevin Love could all help the U.S. work around not having James. Curry's teammates Klay Thompson and Andre Iguodala and the Houston Rockets' James Harden also could move from guard to forward in some lineups.
Colangelo said he feels "very confident" about the team overall.
James Holds Strong Olympics Record
But no player can match James' record at the Olympics. He is the U.S. team's career leader in points and assists. He could become the second four-time U.S. Olympic men's basketball player, alongside Anthony.
Curry withdrew from consideration Monday for what would have been his first Olympics, citing "several factors — including recent ankle and knee injuries."
He didn't say what these other factors were, though several athletes have expressed concerns about the water in Rio de Janeiro and the Zika virus. But Colangelo said the players who have dropped out have done so only because of injuries.
Still, those other factors would make it easier for players to withdraw without being criticized for declining to represent their countries. That's what Durant did when he withdrew late from the 2014 Basketball World Cup.
Several Star Players Unavailable
Curry is the most famous member missing from the two-time gold medal team. The team will already be without NBA All-Stars Chris Paul and Anthony Davis. Forwards Blake Griffin and LaMarcus Aldridge are also unavailable, leaving DeMarcus Cousins, Andre Drummond, Dwight Howard and DeAndre Jordan to fill in for them.
Paul, who won two gold medals with the U.S. team, had already chosen not to play this time. Fellow point guards John Wall of the Washington Wizards and Mike Conley of the Memphis Grizzlies are coming off injuries. But the national team still has Oklahoma City Thunder's Russell Westbrook, Cleveland's Kyrie Irving and the Portland Trail Blazers' Damian Lillard as possible replacements for him.
Curry likely would have started either ahead of those players or alongside one in the U.S. backcourt, as he did as the shooting guard next to Irving at the World Cup. He made 44 percent of his attempts then from the shorter international 3-point arc, and the Americans will miss his shooting against the zone defenses they face.
Curry: Decision "Extremely Difficult"
Curry has won a pair of world titles and had spoken of wanting the chance to win Olympic gold. But he missed six games in the postseason with a right knee injury.
"My previous experiences with USA Basketball have been incredibly rewarding, educational and enjoyable," Curry said. That "made this an extremely difficult decision for me and my family."
Curry, the first player to be voted MVP by all voting members unanimously and the NBA's leading scorer, could have been the U.S. team's biggest star in Rio. Instead, perhaps it could be Durant, who was the team's star player in the 2012 Olympics and 2010 world basketball championship before dropping out in 2014.
Colangelo said USA Basketball is continually checking in with players to gauge their interest, believing that everyone who hasn't pulled out yet would go if selected. And he can't worry about the players who have already declined the offer.
"You know what, you've got to be a big boy about it," Colangelo said. "These are the cards that are dealt."
Editor's Note: Russell Westbrook and James Harden have dropped out since this article was printed.
      
      