Guardian Editor's Note: After our in-depth investigation of the issues faced by young adults, Noreena Hertz takes a look at the lives of today’s teenagers, after interviewing 2,000 of them in the past 18 months – and finds a generation who feels profoundly anxious and distrustful.
Sarah is 18 years old. When she woke up after surgery, her first words were not "mum" or "nurse.” They were "iPhone, iPhone.”
Sarah belongs to the smartphone generation. They are young people who are between 14 and 21 years old. They can also be known as Generation K. The K stands for Katniss Everdeen. She is the heroine of "The Hunger Games."  Like Katniss, these young people feel that their world is unfair and cruel. 
Technology is very important for Generation K. Their technology devices are permanently on.
“Life for us is hard. A struggle,” Jake says. He is 16. “I think we’ve got it much tougher than our parents’ generation. But we can’t give up.” A World Health Organization report said that British teenagers are among the most unhappy in the world.
Worried About Employment, Debt, Violence
They think their lives are likely to be harder than their parents’ lives. Eight out of 10 worry about getting a job when they grow up. Seven out of 10 worry about owing money.
Generation K is also growing up during a time of increased violence. Seven out of 10 say they are worried about it.
Only 6 out of 100 trust big companies to do the right thing. Sixty out of 100 adults feel that way.
Generation K also does not trust the government to do the right thing. They do not feel that politicians care about ordinary people.
Wanting To Help Others, Wishing For Fair Treatment
The selfie generation is not that selfish after all. Nine out of 10 believe that helping others in need is important. Seven out of 10 worry that people are not treated fairly.
Yet not one teenager surveyed agreed that everyone has an equal chance in life. Instead, they believe that skin color, gender and money make a difference.
For U.S. teens, their favorite celebrity was Felix Kjellberg. He is the 26-year-old Swedish YouTube superstar known as PewDiePie.
Kjellberg films himself playing video games. Teens like that he comes across as a real person. In his videos he laughs, swears and goofs around.
Loneliness In Front Of The Computer Screens
“Many people see me as a friend they can chill with for 15 minutes a day,” Kjellberg says. “The loneliness in front of the computer screens brings us together.”
Generation K is lonelier than we might realize. They spend so much time in front of a screen. Yet their favorite activities are those they can do with other people. Eight out of 10 would rather spend time with their friends in person rather than on the phone or online.
Members of Generation K do not just want to buy stuff. They want to make it themselves. Sarah builds her own computers, and Jake loves making horror films with his pals on his iPhone.
This Generation Is Unlike Any Other
Starbucks has figured this out. Did you know that you can go into a Starbucks and order a mojito refresher? It turns out British and American teenagers do. They’ve been going crazy for Starbucks’ “secret menu." It lets them create any concoction they can come up with. The cotton candy frappuccino is one of their favorites. Starbucks has made a genius move. Non-coffee-drinking teenagers are among its fastest growing group of customers.
This generation takes selfies, but they are not selfish. They are connected yet lonely. They are very different than generations that came before. They know this already, and they have got the cotton candy frappuccinos to prove it.
      
      