Guardian Editor's Note: After our in-depth investigation of the issues faced by young adults, Noreena Hertz takes a look at the lives of today’s teenagers, after interviewing 2,000 of them in the past 18 months – and finds a generation who feels profoundly anxious and distrustful.
When Sarah woke up after an operation, her first words were not "mom" or "nurse.” They were "iPhone, iPhone.”
Eighteen-year-old Sarah belongs to the smartphone generation, also known as Gen Z.
Technology is important to the millennial generation, which are people between 20 and 35 years old. But it is essential to those such as Sarah who belong to Gen Z, who are between 14 and 21. Their devices are permanently switched on and multitasking. I call them Generation K, after Katniss Everdeen, the heroine of the "Hunger Games." Like Katniss, they feel the world they live in is a struggle -- unequal and harsh.
Pressured By Schoolwork And Worried About Looks
“Life for us is hard. A struggle,” says Jake, 16. “I think we’ve got it much tougher than our parents’ generation. But we can’t give up.” A World Health Organization report, published recently, suggests that British teenagers are among the most troubled in the world. Of the 42 countries surveyed, only Macedonian and Polish teens are more unhappy. Our teenagers say they feel pressured by schoolwork and worried about the way they look. Researchers say that young people ages 11 to 15 are less satisfied with life.
And little wonder. When asked whether they think their lives are likely to be more of a struggle than those of their parents’, their answer is a clear yes. Eight out of 10 worry about getting a job while 7 out of 10 worry about owing money. Asked to draw what debt means for them, they offer images including chains, handcuffs and prison bars.
Generation K is also growing up during a time of increased threat of violence. Seven out of 10 say they are worried about terrorism.
A Big Distrust Of Big Corporations And Government
Only 6 out of 100 trust big companies to do the right thing. Sixty out of 100 adults feel that way.
Generation K's feelings about government are also negative. Only 1 in 10 say they trust the government to do the right thing. Generation K also does not feel that politicians care about ordinary people.
But sometimes they sense that a politician is different. Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders has been extremely popular among younger voters. Even among British teenagers, Sanders was the only politician they said they trusted. 
The selfie generation is not, it turns out, that selfish after all. Nine out of 10 believe that helping others in need is important, and 7 out of 10 worry about inequality.
They Do Not Believe Everyone Has An Equal Shot
This generation does not believe that life will be fair. In fact, not one teenager surveyed agrees with the statement that “society is fair and everyone has an equal chance.” Instead, they believe that the color of their skin, their gender and how much money their parents have will determine their future.
Among the U.S. teenagers interviewed, their favorite celebrity was Felix Kjellberg. He is the 26-year old Swedish YouTube superstar, better known as PewDiePie.
Kjellberg films himself playing video games. Teens like that Kjellberg comes across as a real person, and in his videos he laughs, swears and goofs around.
“Many people see me as a friend they can chill with for 15 minutes a day,” Kjellberg says. “The loneliness in front of the computer screens brings us together.”
Despite All The Time With Friends Online, They Are Lonely
He is on to something here: Generation K is far lonelier than we might realize. With all the time they spend texting, gaming and on Snapchat or Tumblr, the activities they most enjoyed are things they can do with other people. Eighty percent prefer spending time with their friends in person rather than on the phone or online.
Members of Generation K do not just want to buy stuff. They are a generation of makers, creators and inventors. Sarah builds her own computers, and Jake loves making horror films with his pals on his iPhone.
A Generation Like None That Has Come Before
Starbucks has figured this out. Did you know that you can go into a Starbucks and order a mojito refresher? It turns out British and American teenagers do. They’ve been going crazy for Starbucks’ “secret menu,” which allows them to create any concoction they come up with. The cotton candy frappuccino is one of their favorites. By tapping into this world, Starbucks has made a genius move, and teenagers who do not drink coffee are among its fastest-growing customers.
This generation is selfie-taking yet unselfish, connected yet lonely, anxious yet realistic. Generation K is a very different generation from those that came before. They know this already, and they have got the cotton candy frappuccinos to prove it.
      
      