The protests in North Dakota are not yet over. People are fighting against an oil pipeline. 
It is called the Dakota Access Pipeline. It is a big tube that will carry oil from one place to another. Oil is important because it provides energy.
The company building the pipeline is called Energy Transfer Partners. Part of the pipeline would go under the Missouri River. It is near the land of the Standing Rock Sioux. The Sioux are a Native American tribe. They do not want the pipeline to be built near their water.
They are worried it is dangerous. They are also worried it could hurt land that is sacred.
Pipeline Has Been Stopped For Now
Crowds of people traveled there to set up camp to protest, or fight. They said they would stay until the pipeline was stopped. 
Then, a government group told the company to stop building the pipeline. It has been stopped for now.
The government told the company to look at ways to build away from the tribal lands.
Both sides are now deciding what to do next.
David Archambault II is a Sioux leader. He said they did what they wanted to do.
He then talked about their next big job.
Winter Storms Could Send Protesters Home
Donald Trump soon will be the new U.S. president. Things might change under Trump. It is a good time to teach him, Archambault said. They want Trump to know how much Native Americans have done to help the country, he said.
It has gotten cold as winter gets closer. Yet some protesters keep coming to Standing Rock. Some went to other places after winter storms hit the camp.
Archambault said that people should leave as it gets colder. “It’s time for everybody to go home and be safe,” he said.
Eyeing The Pipeline's Path
The pipeline could still happen. It is only stopped for now.
A court could let Energy Transfer Partners finish building it.
Trump said he thinks the pipeline should be built. Jason Miller works for Trump. Miller said that Trump will think about it some more.
Energy Transfer Partners is still fighting. The company said it plans to finish the pipeline. It said it expects to complete the pipeline without changing the path.
Tribe leaders have asked protesters to go home. Some protesters still plan to stay at the camp.
Chase Iron Eyes lives at Standing Rock. He asked people to stay until they know for sure that the pipeline will not be built.
      
      