DURHAM, N.C. — Rene Chavez of Laredo, Texas, lost his left hand in an accident when he was just 4 years old. On June 8, almost 50 years later, he flexed the fingers on a new left hand provided by doctors.
The surgery to give Chavez a new hand, the first of its kind in North Carolina, was the result of years of planning. Researchers developed new drugs to ensure the hand will not be rejected by Chavez's immune system.
Dr. Linda Cendales at Duke University Hospital said she "prefers to consider this the beginning" of an advanced surgical program. The trials are funded by the U.S. government. Eventually, the team hopes to give functional, human limbs to injured members of the military and others. 
Surgery Involves Many Doctors
Once Chavez was prepared for his big day, a donor match was found within a week. His surgery took place May 27. Originally, Chavez was left-handed. Speaking through an interpreter at a news conference on June 8, Chavez said he's looking forward to having full use of his left hand again.
The multistage, 12-hour procedure was performed by a team of 17 surgeons and 17 anesthesiologists, nurses, and operating room staff and technicians. The division of labor was very organized.
A pair of doctors connected the bones of the donated arm to Chavez's forearm with metal pieces. Other doctors stitched together the blood vessels, tendons, muscles and skin. As Chavez heals, his nerves will creep about 1 inch every month into his new hand. They are like roots in a growing tree, according to Dr. David Ruch at Duke. When Chavez's nerve endings reach the tips of his new fingers, the surgery will be considered a success.
The surgical team was brought together by Dr. Allan Kirk, head of surgery at Duke. It was led by Cendales. She helped start the first hand transplant program in the U.S. in Kentucky before coming to Duke in 2014.
New Body Part Comes With Risks
The surgery is just one of the breakthroughs developed to give Chavez his new hand. He is being treated with a new drug that the team hopes will allow his body to accept the foreign limb. One main risk of transplant surgery is that the patient’s body will reject, or attack, the new body part. Standard anti-rejection medication sharply weakens a patient's immune system, Kirk said. This increases the risk of a patient getting an infection, especially after an intense surgery.
The Duke team's drug will "train" Chavez's body to recognize the transplanted hand as a familiar part and prevent it from attacking it. Kirk said the idea for the drug was inspired by the way pregnant women's bodies keep from attacking the babies growing inside them. 
Chavez lost his left hand when he reached into a meat grinder, and his brother accidentally turned it on. He worked as a car dealer in Laredo until he learned on the internet that he could get a new hand. Then he found the program at Duke. Now, Cendales says, "rehabilitation is his full-time job."
Learning To Live With Two Hands
Chavez has already begun the long process of physical therapy to learn how to use his left hand. He will also meet with therapists to process the difficult feelings involved with learning how to live with two hands, after spending most of his life with one. Ruch explained that the way Chavez's brain will learn how to use his new hand could be helpful to clinicians. For example, they might use it to treat stroke victims who have lost the use of one side of their bodies.
Chavez is one of only 90 people to undergo a hand transplant worldwide. The importance of this chance is not lost on him. He expressed sympathy to the nameless donor's family and says he is grateful to the surgical team and for the care given to him at Duke. The U.S. Department of Defense will pay for Cendales and the Hand Transplantation Program to do more trial transplants. They will be looking for more patients to get involved.
      
      