SAADNAYEL, Lebanon — Saddam al-Khleif is a refugee from Syria. He and his family fled the country when civil war broke out there five years ago. They now live in Lebanon.
Khleif is 11 years old, but he does not go to school. He spends most of his days either watching TV or playing outside his tent.
Al-Khleif's two older brothers do not go to school either. Instead, they work to support their family. Their father, Hussein, has been suffering from permanent head and stomach aches that prevent him from working.
"I love to play and prefer to go to work rather than going to school," said al-Khleif, who around noon on Tuesday was still wearing his pajamas. He was sitting on a plastic chair watching cartoons on TV inside his tent. "I went to school for six months in Lebanon then stopped," he added. He said he would look for work to support his family.
Many Syrian Refugee Children Don't Attend School
There are many children like al-Khleif. Tens of thousands of school-age Syrian children in Lebanon do not go to school. 
The organization Human Rights Watch (HRW) has been investigating the situation and released a report Tuesday. It warns that more than half of the nearly 500,000 school-age Syrian children in Lebanon do not receive any formal education.
The report raises concerns that an entire generation of Syrian children might grow up without education.
Like al-Khleif, 10-year-old Loay Mohammed does not attend school. He says he went once, but the students just played all day. He added that it's better for him to stay home rather than walk to school every day and face the danger of being hit by a car.
The two children did not want to give more information to journalists.
Lebanon Allows Free Enrollment For Refugee Children
HRW said Lebanon has allowed Syrian refugee children to enroll for free in public schools. However, limited space in schools and housing issues, as well as work restrictions on their parents, are keeping the young people away from school.
According to the report, Syrian refugees face a number of challenges in Lebanon. They cannot always move freely about the country and they often do not have enough money. Poverty limits parents' ability to send their children to school and contributes to child labor. Syrians moving without residency permits can face trouble from authorities, including arrest.
The report indicates there are nearly half a million Syrian children between 3-18 years old and 18 in Lebanon. Only 158,000 non-Lebanese children, mostly Syrians, are enrolled in public schools. About 87,000 are enrolled in private or semiprivate schools, HRW said.
Since Syria's conflict began in March 2011, hundreds of thousands of Syrians have fled to Lebanon. Lebanon is now home to about 1.1 million registered refugees.
Children Out Of School An "Immediate Crisis"
Bassam Khawaja, who works in the children's rights division at HRW, said "bold reforms" are needed. 
"Despite Lebanon's progress in enrolling Syrian children, the huge number of children still out of school is an immediate crisis," he said. "Children should not have to sacrifice their education to seek safety from the horrors of war in Syria."
Lebanon has taken some steps to address the problem. Syrian refugee children have been allowed to enroll in public schools even if they don't have residency permits. The country also made more space in classrooms by opening an afternoon shift in 238 schools in the 2015-16 school year.
Some Spots In School Went Unclaimed
The Education Ministry announced plans to enroll 200,000 Syrian refugees in formal public education, with international support, as part of the Reaching All Children with Education policy adopted in June 2014, HRW said.
Although the number of classroom spaces for Syrian children in Lebanese public schools increased every year from 2011-15, HRW said that in 2015-16, schools were still turning away Syrian children. This was because the available space was not necessarily located in areas of need, or because children faced other barriers.
Of the 200,000 funded school spaces for Syrian children, almost 50,000 ultimately went unused, the report said.
Many Must Work To Support Families
Al-Khleif's mother said the reason her children don't go to school is because their father is sick and they need to help the family. She said her older sons Ayad and Ayman are workers who make about $10 each a day.
She said Ayman was a very intelligent student who finished grade seven before dropping out.
"When Ayman was asked by his father to choose between work or education, he chose education," said the woman. "But things changed because of the harsh life conditions."
      
      