MEXICO CITY, Mexico — To understand the size of Arroyo Restaurant, a Mexico City institution since the 1940s, consider the tortillas.
On a busy Sunday, the restaurant’s army of cooks may prepare as many as 15,000 of them, served steaming in fabric pouches. How else would droves of hungry customers scoop up mole and slow-cooked barbacoa at the largest Mexican restaurant in the world?
Arroyo doesn’t claim to be the hippest or fanciest restaurant serving Mexican food, but its owners say it is the biggest.
The restaurant sprawls over several blocks in the city’s Tlalpan neighborhood. It has seating for 2,200 customers and parking for 600 cars.
It's Like A Small City Inside
Hidden behind a fortress-like wall, it functions like a small city. Along with nine big dining rooms, each featuring a stage where mariachis perform, a large bull ring is on the premises, an artisanal market and an elaborate jungle gym for children. There's even an on-site infirmary (where the most common complaints are stomach aches blamed on overeating).
With its tile floors and traditional menu, the restaurant is a blast from the past in a rapidly modernizing city. In some neighborhoods of Mexico City, sushi and pizza joints now outnumber Mexican restaurants.
On the weekends, multiple generations of families come to Arroyo to eat tacos and drink tequila at long wooden tables that call to mind a countryside estate. The food is the kind served by Mexican grandmothers, and the mariachis stick to classic songs.
Nostalgia Reigns
“There is so much nostalgia for older times,” said Jose Arroyo, whose grandparents founded the restaurant in 1940. He now helps his father run it. “Here people can enjoy the old way of life in the provinces without ever leaving the city.”
He has another theory about the restaurant’s lasting success.
“It’s about identity,” he said. “People come here to feel the pride of being Mexican.”
At a time when many here feel deeply offended by the anti-Mexican rhetoric of U.S. presidential candidate Donald Trump and are fed up with Mexico’s violence and corruption, the country’s rich cultural traditions are a place where many find solace.
Enjoying Mexican Culture
The chance to sit back and enjoy Mexican culture was one reason Minerva Mogollan Garcia visited Arroyo recently with a dozen family members and friends. They sat alongside 300 other diners while Mexican ballerinas danced onstage.
“You don’t want to see bad things in your country,” said Mogollan, who works at Mexico City’s Soumaya art museum. “All of this makes me feel proud.”
Her husband, Oscar Marquez, who has been going to Arroyo since he was a child, said he was there for more than just patriotic reasons.
“I came for the barbacoa,” he said.
Barbacoa, a form of cooking meat that is popular in central Mexico, is the restaurant’s specialty. Cooks at Arroyo roast mutton wrapped in agave plant leaves for at least 12 hours. To meet the needs of so many customers, they operate seven barbecue pits at the same time. Nearby is the chicharron station, where chefs say they dip 44 pounds of pigskins into sizzling cauldrons of oil every weekend.
Staff Can Top A Thousand
During the busy fall and winter holiday seasons, the restaurant employs well over 1,000 people.
There’s the woman whose sole task is to monitor the mole, a traditional Mexican sauce. There's also the woman who spends all day rinsing corn kernels so they can be mashed with water and pressed into perfect, palm-sized tortillas.
“A lot of people want to eat at sophisticated restaurants that are always inventing new things,” said Claudia San Emeterio Velasco, who is in charge of the restaurant’s catering business. “We try to do it very traditional here.”
The restaurant began when a couple from the nearby state of Hidalgo brought their family’s barbacoa recipes to a little open-air restaurant in what was then a rural suburb of Mexico City. The restaurant grew with the city around it as its business-savvy owners pushed the definition of what a restaurant could be. At one point, Arroyo said, his grandmother operated a small zoo on the restaurant grounds.
Famous People Visit
The couple’s son took over after his parents died. A wall of photographs at the restaurant shows him, with long sideburns, shaking hands with some of the famous people who have eaten here over the years. There are pictures of former presidents, famous professional Mexican wrestlers, and stars of Mexico’s golden age of cinema, like the actress and singer Maria Felix.
While international tourists flock to high-end restaurants in trendy neighborhoods such as La Roma and Juarez, Arroyo draws a largely Mexican crowd. Many stop by when they’re in town from other parts of the country.
“It’s like visiting Texas and going to Rudy’s for barbecue,” said Javier Mejia from Cuernavaca, referring to a famous Texas BBQ spot. “It’s like really, really Mexican. It’s old-school.”
Arroyo said he is considering expanding the restaurant north of the border. He thinks Latinos living in the United States are probably nostalgic for traditional Mexican culture and food, too.
On a recent Sunday, he sat down at a table with one of his employees and a friend. He ordered a round of quesadillas, some barbacoa and a plate of fried gusanos, or worms. The tortillas arrived, and he spooned one full of meat, closing his eyes as he bit into it. “Still good,” he said.
      
      