BOZEMAN, Mont. — Jack Horner is leaving the Montana museum he spent years filling with fossils from across the globe. Horner is the dinosaur researcher who discovered the world's first dinosaur embryos, or unborn baby dinosaurs. He also found that dinosaurs had nests and cared for their young. 
Horner, 69, Is one of the best-known dinosaur researchers, or paleontologists, in the world. In the book "Jurassic Park," author Michael Crichton based the character Alan Grant on Horner. Movie director Steven Spielberg asked Horner to help with all of the "Jurassic Park" movies. Horner did it all without a college degree and with dyslexia, a disability that can make reading difficult.
Dinosaurs By The Thousands
From his base at the Museum of the Rockies in Bozeman, Montana, Horner discovered a dozen types of dinosaurs. He also found the first dinosaur eggs in the western half of the world and provided proof that dinosaurs and birds are close relatives. He built the Museum of the Rockies from eight dinosaur samples to more than 35,000.
Horner now plans to turn his attention back to education. He said he will teach a class at Chapman University in California.
His struggles with dyslexia caused him to flunk out of college several times. At first, it hurt his ability to raise money for his work. Horner still reads at a third-grade level. He says he has written more books than he has read.
World's Richest Dinosaur Site
One of his most important discoveries came in the summer of 1979. He found dinosaur nests on what was later called Egg Mountain in Montana. He found them less than a mile from where he had discovered the fossils, or remains, of young dinosaurs a year earlier.
"That one square mile out there is the richest dinosaur site in the world," he said.
Little was known at that time about young dinosaurs. With the finds, Horner's path was set. Research money came pouring in from the National Science Foundation and others. The head of the Museum of the Rockies was tired of seeing Horner take the valuable samples out of Montana so he hired him as the museum's paleontologist.
After that, Horner led crews in a single digging season from Montana to Mongolia. He started building one of the largest Tyrannosaurus rex and Triceratops collections in the world.
Dino Work Is Never Done
Horner has been working on the chickenosaurus, or dino-chicken. His idea is to use dinosaur DNA found in chickens to give them some qualities of their ancestors, such as a long tail.
Horner continues to work on that project. He is also very busy with other things. He has five books in the works, including a book about his life. He is also helping to develop an app.
He says he will not give up dinosaur hunting. The University of Washington is planning to open a new museum. Horner has agreed to help fill it with dinosaurs.
"I Filled This Place Up"
The Museum of the Rockies is overflowing with dinosaur fossils after Horner's 34 years in charge of paleontology there. The museum will become bigger to bring its collection under one roof. There will not be room for anything new to work on, he said.
"I filled this place up. There's no reason to just stay," Horner said.
The Museum of the Rockies has not yet found anyone to take over Horner's job. Members of Horner's team say he will be difficult to replace, but the museum is strong enough now to stand on its own.
Horner is most interested in working in education the way he worked in paleontology. He made his most famous discoveries because he was unafraid to take a hammer to a dinosaur egg. Everybody else thought eggs were too precious to crack, he said.
"I made a discovery because I had a hammer," Horner said. "That kind of thinking is basically what I made my career on."
      
      