Science has not been a big part of this election. Still, science is very important.
ScienceDebate.org asked the two persons running for president, Democrat Hillary Clinton and Republican Donald Trump, to share their ideas. Parts of their answers are printed below.
Global Warming And Cybersecurity
Question: The Earth is heating up. This is called global warming. Scientists say one reason for global warming is too many fossil fuels. Fossil fuels come from nature. These include fuel from wood, oil and coal. What are your ideas on global warming? How would you act on those ideas?
Clinton: The science is clear. Global warming is a big problem. I will set three goals. The first is to create most of our electricity from clean sources. These sources will not cause global warming. Solar power, or power from the sun, is one example. The second goal is to stop wasting energy. We should build machines that use less energy. The third goal is to stop using so much oil.
Trump: We still need to look into “global warming.” It may not be the most important thing. We may want to spend our money on other things.  
Q: What steps will you take to protect Americans from cyberattack? These attacks could come from anywhere. They could affect government computers.
Clinton: I will build on President Obama's work. I will update our cybersecurity system. I will have someone focus on cybersecurity. I also think the government and companies should work together. 
We will treat cyberattacks just like any other attack. We will be ready with serious responses.
Trump: Any attack on our government computers and emails needs a response. The response should figure out who made the attack. It should also get rid of threats to our government systems.
Energy And Education
Q: As president, what will your plan for energy be?
Clinton: We will make laws about pollution. We will make fossil fuels in a safe way. We will spend money to find other power sources.
Trump: We rely on other countries for oil. This is a bad thing. We must explore every possible power source. The American people will decide the best sources of energy.
Q: How would you prepare students for today's world?
Clinton: Every student should be able to learn computer science. 
Trump: There are already many science and math programs. Companies should bring better education to more children.
Clean Water
Q: What steps will you take to ensure all Americans have clean water?
Clinton: We will make a new lab. This lab will bring many people together. They will make new technology. Industries and environmental projects across the country will use it. The lab will make our water systems safer and better.
Trump: This may be the most important issue we face. We must look into all options. This includes making it cheaper to turn salt water into fresh water.
      
      