LOS ANGELES, Calif. — The first period of any school day can be busy, with bells ringing, friends catching up on gossip and late arrivals rushing madly through doors. But early on a Thursday morning, the students in teacher Jon Aguado’s history class in Los Angeles are respectful and silent.
Guest speaker Gabriella Karin tells her chilling experiences in Slovakia during World War II.
Like Anne Frank, Karin was born to Jewish parents and was 11 when she and her family were forced into hiding. They were hiding to avoid deportation to a Nazi concentration camp. 
“In this small, one-bedroom apartment we're hiding eight people,” she tells the classroom. “Imagine for nine months sitting on a chair and not being able to move,” adds Karin, now 85. 
The class is fascinated. When the presentation ends, a few students ask questions and clap in applause. However, rather than discussing the history of the Holocaust, they reach for art supplies.
Program Brings Art To Underserved Schools
Karin’s talk — and the flurry of art-making that follows — is part of an innovative program called Share Our Stories: Reflections Through Art. It was established by the Los Angeles Museum of the Holocaust and uses art to teach students in underserved schools about the Holocaust.
For three years, the museum has partnered with three high schools and one middle school so L.A. students can visit the museum and have guest speakers from the museum to visit those schools in return. These exchanges result in collaborative class art projects including paintings, installations and group quilts. The museum then displays the art in its galleries.
Aguado, the teacher who helped start the program, says creating art after a discussion can offer students a better connection to the subject matter than a talk alone.
“For students, it can be hard to express their emotions and thoughts,” he says. “For these talks, we don’t ask them to write an essay. In this way, they can express themselves more fully without fear of judgment.”
A Connection Between Holocaust Survivors, Schoolchildren
Samara Hutman, executive director at the museum, says the program connects L.A. schoolchildren and the last generation of Holocaust and Jewish World War II survivors in a strong way. 
“The art is so important because it really allows the kids to see something through other lenses,” she says. 
“I feel like in a talk, you can miss out on the details,” says 16-year-old sophomore Ximena Reyes. “But with art, you can express the details, you can fill in the blanks.”
For her painting, she created a cave to represent the Holocaust, and out of it emerges flocks of birds that symbolize survivors.
“It helps me understand the importance of standing up for the right things,” she adds. “If everything stays quiet, nothing changes.”
Teacher Wanted His Students To Meet Holocaust Survivors
The program was born of a conversation between Aguado and Hutman in 2013. Aguado had attended a teachers’ program at the museum and was touched by the director's comment that this generation of students will likely be the last generation to meet a survivor. Unfortunately, regular field trips to the museum for his history students were out of the question for financial reasons. That’s where the museum, combined with a grant from a group that supports the arts called the Max H. Gluck Foundation, came in. Since the students couldn't come to the museum, Hutman explained, they would bring the museum to the students. 
The pilot program was led by Aguado at Animo Ralph Bunche, where his students collaborated on a quilt inspired by the life story of a Holocaust survivor. 
In the class, Karin explained that by 1944, the entire family was forced into hiding at a family friend's small apartment in a building whose rules didn’t allow Jews as residents. This meant the Nazis were unlikely to search the apartment because Jews weren't allowed in the first place.
To occupy herself during that period, Karin says she read everything she could lay her hands on, including authors Dostoevsky to Tolstoy.
“Everything can be taken from you — even the clothes you wear,” Karin tells the class. “But no one can take away what’s in your head, so put good things in there.”
"They Can't Take What's In Your Mind"
The words Karin used to tell her story resonate with the students, who write words such as “faith” and “hope” on the small plastic discs they’ve been given. One young man stencils out the phrase, “They can’t take what’s in your mind.”
Since the pilot in 2013, the Share Our Stories art program has been replicated many times at the participating schools. In addition to the history lesson, speakers like Karin can help students in low-income, underserved communities have hope. Some of the students are the children of Central American refugees or refugees themselves who can directly relate to Karin's story. Hearing how Karin survived the bad and the good can make a world of difference, says Hutman. 
Karin continued her life after the Holocaust and was able to move with her husband in 1960 to Los Angeles, where she had a long and successful career in the fashion industry. These days, Karin focuses on her work with the museum, where she has served for roughly 20 years as a guide, guest speaker and exhibiting artist. 
Aguado says that even after the sessions end, his students often continue to bring up their experiences from Share Our Stories. Some take their families to the museum to show off the collaborative artworks put on display. Since the students talk about it with their families, the memory of the Holocaust continues.
      
      