KABUL, Afghanistan — Almost everyone here knows the legend of Kabul's cruel king. Kabulis recite it when they see Sher Darwaza Mountain. Look closely, they tell visitors. You will see an ancient wall running along the mountain's edge. It looks like the teeth of a saw.
This is the Great Wall of Kabul. The wall holds terrible secrets. Kabul is the capital of Afghanistan in Asia.
The legend takes place about 1,500 years ago. This was around the year 500 A.D. Kabul's king forced his male subjects to build the Great Wall to protect the city from invaders. Anyone who refused to work on the wall was buried inside it.
"Maybe something like that happened," said Aziz Ahmed Panjshiri, a historian. "We have many legends about the cruel king.
Science Shakes Up The Story
A few years ago, history got some help from science.
In April 2013, heavy rains caused part of the wall to fall down. Something smooth and pale was found in the damp dirt.
It was a human skull.
"This skull shows that the stories were true," said Abdul Ahad Abassy. He is in charge of Afghanistan's Department of Historical Monuments.
But Science added another chapter to the legend of Kabul's cruel king.
Experts in Germany tested the skull. They found that it was not, in fact, 1,500 years old. Instead, it just about about 500 years old.
"They sent it back and said, 'This is not old,' " Panjshiri said.
An Old Skull — But Not Old Enough
Afghanistan is an ancient country.  Finding a 500-year-old skull is not a big deal.
The city of Balkh, in northern Afghanistan, is almost 5,700 years old, Panjshiri said proudly. Balkh was once one of the greatest cities on Earth. It was the center of a great empire. It stretched from Greece in the west to India in the east.
Some scholars say the Great Wall was built about 1,500 years ago. Most of them believe it was built about 200 years later. Panjshiri claims it is much older.
In one popular story, the wall was built 1,500 years ago by Zamburak Shah. The king was so cruel that his subjects killed him and buried him inside his own wall. Sometimes, the tale says, it was a beautiful slave girl who tricked the king.
Most people say the king buried his subjects in the wall. As is common in Afghan tales, this story has no happy ending.
Three years ago, rain uncovered the skull and other bones. In April 2013, the mayor of Kabul sent Panjshiri and a photographer to investigate.
Legend Changes To Fit The Facts
Word spread around Kabul that the legend was true. The German scientists dated the skull to about 1,550, or 1,000 years after Zamburak Shah died.
Now the story has changed. A group of popular kings who ruled Kabul 500 years ago have been blamed. The greatest of these kings, known as Babur, was a warrior poet. He loved Kabul so much that he was buried here.
"When skeletons or skulls come up, it's easy to weave stories around them," said Thomas Barfield. He is a professor at Boston University. Barfield added that stories can tell much about how people think and feel in the present.
Sometimes archaeologists figure out that the story does not quite fit the facts, Barfield said with a laugh. Archaeologists study ancient things to find out about the past. "Once again, science ruins a really good story."
      
      