TEHRAN, Iran — Mahamad Reza Rohi ducked behind the door of his tricked-out Ford car. He slipped out of his street clothes and climbed into a red racer's jumpsuit.
The guys in his pit crew — buddies from around Tehran — were making quick work of breakfast: cream cheese and flatbread spread out on newspaper across the shiny hood of the Ford.
More cars pulled into the gravel lot: Toyotas, Hondas, Peugeots, Iranian-made vehicles and the occasional BMW. The morning stillness over the tree-filled park was drowned out by the thrum of engines and the screech of tires.
Friday is not just for prayers in Iran, a country that is mostly Muslim. For a small community of car enthusiasts, it is also race day.
Tehran Has Serious Car Fans
“We do it for love,” said Rohi, a 30-year-old government worker. He is a regular in the weekly amateur drag races hosted by the Motorcycle and Automobile Federation of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Drag races, even amateur ones, might seem like a luxury. Iran's businesses have suffered because some other countries have stopped trading with Iran. Just that day, inside a grand hall at the other end of town, a gray-bearded Muslim religious leader lectured about the value of living simply as he led hundreds of people in weekly prayers.
Still, Tehran is home to serious car fans. Their interest shows on its clogged highways and in the mechanics who keep old vehicles chugging along.
Most of the 60-some stock cars at the racetrack outside Azadi Stadium, on Tehran’s western edge, were at least 10 years old. Many were outfitted by the drivers themselves, some with exposed wires snaking down the interiors.
Passion Project
Rohi grew up with fast cars. He looked up to his father, a decorated driver who often refereed at the races, which have been running for more than 20 years.
The tires, gearbox, engine — everything but the body, really — were ripped from Rohi’s Ford Festiva. He spent about $10,000 on an engine he located in Dubai, removed the rear seats to reduce weight and scavenged other parts from garages.
“I save money and I cut my other expenses to do what I love to do,” he said. “I’m single; I don’t have any children.”
He patted the hood of his Ford lovingly.
“This is my wife,” he said as his friends howled with laughter.
Privileged Middle Class Drivers
Two things were evident on race day. One was the disposable income that marked the drivers as members of a privileged middle class. The other was testosterone.
A few hundred people — nearly all of them men — packed into bleachers to watch the late-morning races. A sheet-metal roof provided little shelter from the summer sun. A handful of women, mostly wives or girlfriends of the drivers, sat in a separate area.
In a grassy pit area separated from the track by a fence, Alireza Emamgholipour, a 29-year-old with spiked hair, stood over his modified gray Peugeot. He eyed a new set of tires.
A mechanic, Emamgholipour poured the profits from his garage in Tehran into his own car. At 10 years old and a normal size, his car looked more like a taxi than a speed demon from the outside. However, inside he had changed the brakes and gearbox and installed a nicer four-cylinder Japanese engine.
He cranked the ignition, bringing a low roar from under the hood.
He said he was crazy about cars as a child. “You don’t give that up very easily,” he said.
For The Love Of Racing
Nearly all the drivers agreed that parts were hard to come by. Iran’s automobile industry, once the envy of the Middle East, churns out spares, but serious drivers prefer more expensive, foreign-made parts.
Club members pay about $100 annually in dues and $35 to enter a race. Winners get prizes, but rarely any cash.
The first pair of cars stood at the starting line, separated by judges who watched an electronic clock. The starter went off and the drivers kicked into gear, speeding a quarter-mile down the length of the track in about 10 seconds. 
Standing behind the fence, Sina Mustatab, 27, was sweating in his jumpsuit. A self-employed computer technician, he watched the races for several years before entering this one, his first.
He and a friend worked for nine months on his box-shaped Saipa compact, one of the few Iranian-made vehicles to enter. He poured $7,000 into parts and an engine from Dubai, and cut a hole in the hood to add another exhaust pipe.
Now the humble Saipa roared and Mustatab put on a helmet.
“You’ve seen the traffic in Tehran,” he said, sliding behind the wheel. “There is nowhere else in the city that you can drive this fast.”
      
      