Children are gathered on a field in Jeremie, a town on the coast of Haiti. They have their eyes on a drone. The small, remote-controlled airplane is about to take flight. 
From the air, the drone will take pictures of Haiti. This Caribbean nation was badly battered by Hurricane Matthew. Now, drones are tracking the damage.
The storm hit on October 4. Its powerful winds reached 145 miles an hour. The hurricane hit the town of Jeremie very hard. About 31,000 people live in Jeremie.
Many people were killed during the storm. Many more people lost their homes. 
Now, almost three weeks later, people in Jeremie are still waiting for help. The drone is a new tool for helping them.
Pictures Show Who Needs Help
A group called Potentiel 3.0 went to Jeremie after the hurricane. Its members brought four drones. This group flies the drones after storms and other disasters. Then they review the pictures it takes. This lets them plan how to help people on the ground.
Presler Jean has been working with drones for a few years. He uses his computer to fly the drones.
The drones take very clear, detailed pictures, according to Jean. They can even make 3D pictures. 
Thanks to drone pictures, workers were able to quickly fix Jeremie's harbor. This meant ships could come to help right away, said Fred Moine. He runs the drone group.
The drone pictures helped emergency workers. People used the pictures to figure out how much sand was needed to fix the harbor, he said.
More Drone "Pilots" Likely
Drones are faster than bigger planes. They're also much cheaper. They can be flown from the ground by ordinary people, like Jean. 
He remembers the big earthquake that hit Haiti in 2010. It caused a great deal of damage. A lot of people gave money to Haiti then. People did not know the best way to use the money, though. Much of it was wasted. 
The drones can help people make better decisions. 
Time will no longer be wasted on figuring out what is needed, Jean said. 
Potentiel 3.0 wants to train more people to fly drones. This way, different parts of Haiti will all have their own "pilots." They can pitch in after a disaster. This will speed up the relief effort.
The United Nations is a world organization. It said about 1.5 million people in Haiti needed help after Hurricane Matthew. Haiti has a population of over 10 million people.
      
      