LOS ANGELES, Calif. — City officials are taking away tiny houses for homeless people in South Los Angeles. They are about as big as a garden shed, and the city plans to "discard" the houses.
Elvis Summers, who built and donated the structures, removed seven of the gaily painted wooden houses. They come with solar-powered lights and American flags.  He is saving them from the scheduled city sweep planned for later in the week.
Summers says he was once homeless. He placed the tiny houses at city campsites along the 110 Freeway, for homeless people to use instead of tents.
“These people are beaten down so hard, you give them any opportunity to be normal, it lifts them up,” Summers said.
Fans Cite Safety, Low Cost
Councilman Curren Price, said the houses are a serious health and safety risk.
Price said people complain that they must walk into the street to get around the tiny houses.
Some see the tiny homes as a cheap and safer shelter for the homeless.
Neighbors say they are places for lawlessness and criminal activity.
June Ellen Richard, 54, has lived all her life within blocks of where the tiny houses are now placed. She says they are homes for selling drugs and other crimes. Police found a gun in one of the homes.
Law Helps City Take Structures
Mayor Eric Garcetti’s spokeswoman, Connie Llanos, said Garcetti is working hard to get homeless people into permanent housing. She added that the tiny houses just cause more safety problems.
The city passed a new law against “bulky items” that can be taken away by the city. The tiny houses are "bulky items." 
“When the city took the houses, they didn’t offer housing, they straight kicked them out,” Summers said.
More than 30,000 people sleep in city streets in Los Angeles County. The city has adopted a plan to end homelessness over the next 10 years.  However, they do not have the $2 billion dollars to solve the problem.
Donations Paid For Houses
Summers said he and his volunteers have built and placed 37 tiny houses from Van Nuys to Inglewood, California.  More than $100,000 came from people around the world who saw his online video campaign.
“It’s not a permanent solution, but nobody is doing anything for shelter right now,” Summers said. He added that the houses should be given back to him rather than be destroyed.
Kenner Jackson lives in a tiny house with his wife, Becky, and their dog, Cowboy.  He said the city hauled away homeless people’s things and left mattresses and chairs next to the freeway. He says the the houses help now. Plans for houses in the future do not help. 
Johnny Horton, 60, has a blood disease called diabetes. The sores on his legs are covered with bandages. Without his tiny house, he worries about sleeping in the street again.
Ex-Marine Among Homeless
“Laying on that tent on the sidewalk, it’s impossible to keep clean,” Horton said. He just got out of the hospital. They said they would try to get him housing. However, they told him it would take up to three months.
“I grew up in this neighborhood,” Horton said.
The city is going to take Julia Briggs Cannon’s tiny house next. It has flyers on it seeking the whereabouts of her husband, Larry Joe Cannon.
Cannon, 58, said her husband is a Vietnam War-era Marine veteran with mental illness and memory loss. He was hospitalized with a seizure Feb. 5, then he disappeared.
As Summers drove off with Cannon's house on a flatbed trailer, she sat on a thin bedroll on the ground and pointed to the concrete.
“I’m staying right here,” she said, her eyes filling with tears.
      
      