CHARLOTTE, N.C. — Eliza, a 13-year-old Labrador retriever from Charlotte, North Carolina, is a four-legged miracle. Almost a year and a half ago, the dog's cancer was more or less cured at North Carolina State University’s (NCSU) vet school.
Now Eliza and other dog patients might teach researchers something about cancer in their two-legged friends.
The Duke University Cancer Institute and NCSU’s College of Veterinary Medicine have formed the Consortium for Canine Comparative Oncology, or C3O for short. On Friday, more than 150 doctors and researchers gathered in North Carolina for a conference to kick off the new partnership.
C30 is expected to spur more research and bring some start-up money from both universities to get projects underway. They hope to raise enough funds to keep the work going.
Treatment For Dogs Could Work For Humans
Cancer experts and drug developers increasingly believe they can invent successful treatments in dogs, which might work on certain types of human cancers. The field of oncology, or cancer medicine, is moving away from toxic chemotherapies. These chemicals kill cancerous cells but also kill healthy cells as well. New treatments are moving toward medicines targeted to specific tumors and rev up the body's natural disease protection system. It is called the immune system.
Dr. Michael Kastan, executive director of the Duke Cancer Institute, said the time is right to compare treatments in people to treatments in animals other than mice. Dogs and people live in the same environment and share some similar types of tumors.
Many pet owners cannot find or pay for cancer treatment for dogs. Therefore, there should be a large group of pet owners eager to participate in clinical trials, experiments that test new treatments.
“People want to treat the cancers that occur in their pets, and so this is an opportunity to help us learn about how to use these new drugs,” Kastan said. “The dogs will benefit, the owners will benefit and when we take the drugs to humans, we’ll know a lot more about how to use them.”
For Dogs And Humans, Cancer Often Comes With Age
Kastan said half of all dogs over the age of 10 will die of cancer. It’s generally a disease of aging, like in humans. There are differences, most notably that people smoke and get a whole host of cancers that dogs don’t get. At the same time, certain breeds of dogs have a higher rate of cancer.
Eliza the Labrador didn’t smoke but developed what appeared to be a fatal case of mouth and nose cancer.
One warm day in 2014, Eliza’s owner, Lynne Murchison, noticed that the beloved family dog had a swollen snout. At first it seemed like a simple bee sting. But when she took Eliza out for a walk, the dog started bleeding from her mouth.
Later, a veterinarian delivered the bad news. Eliza had maybe five weeks to live. “I was destroyed,” Murchison said.
In the wee hours of a sleepless night, she scoured the North Carolina vet school website, where she scrolled through various clinical trials and hit upon one for mouth tumors. Soon Eliza was in Raleigh, North Carolina. She was the first dog enrolled in the study.
First, veterinarians implanted tiny particles in the tumor, then injected her with drugs and small doses of X-rays that converted to ultraviolet light. It’s a new treatment called Immunolight Therapy. The light turns on the drugs in the tumor, causing the immune system to fight against the cancer.
A Year Later, And The Cancer Was Gone
Eliza had nine treatments spread across a month. At first, one medication caused a bad side effect. Her teeth were loose, she had trouble eating and she began to lose weight. “I didn’t think she was going to make it through,” Murchison said.
Then about halfway through the treatment, fluid began to come from Eliza's nose. In the words of Dr. Mike Nolan, Eliza’s cancer vet at NCSU, the tumor “literally melted away.” The swelling went down and she started to eat again.
Last fall, about a year after the treatment, Nolan found no cancer.
“She’s fat, she loves to eat,” Murchison said. “She’s just a happy girl, and there’s just no sign of the tumor.”
Nolan said that clinical trial ended a few months ago, and the outcome looked promising. Next, doctors will try the same treatment on dogs with another cancer that is similar to a type of cancer that humans get. Lessons can be learned.
“It’s very exciting for what it might bring to the pet population and the human cancer population here,” Nolan said. “It’s exciting for what we might learn globally.”
Reducing Time, Cost Of Treatment
Kastan sees an opportunity to reduce the cost and time of testing treatments in humans. Doctors can figure out how to perfect the methods and drugs in dogs.
Murchison said she’d like to think of Eliza helping humans, while she continues to live longer than the average Labrador.
“I think it’s absolutely the right thing to do,” she said of the clinical trials. “Where else are we going to learn these things?”
      
      