Mavericks near Half Moon Bay in Northern California holds a famous big-wave surfing contest. Until recently the contest, called Titans of Mavericks, has only allowed men to compete in the dangerous waves off rugged Pillar Point.
This month, though, the California Coastal Commission has changed all that. Now women can enter a part of the surfing world they couldn't before. The Commission is a government agency. It works to protect nature on the coastline and makes sure all people get fair and equal use of beaches. They have the power to approve events that are held on the coast. They told Titans of Mavericks it must have a heat, or one round of the contest for women, if it wanted a permit for its 2016-17 contest.
A Great Step Forward
The decision has advanced progress for women who want to do professional big-wave surfing. 
"This is a great step forward for our sport, women's athletics and women," said Bianca Valenti. Valenti is a top female big-wave surfer. She helped to found a group for equality for women in surfing.
The contest has been held nine times since 1998. Only those who have been invited can enter. It usually features 24 top male surfers from around the world. Huge waves arrive during the fall and winter. Competitors get 48 hours notice to report for the one-day event.
Mavericks Is Perfect For Making Huge Waves
Mavericks has the perfect conditions for this contest. Large, deep movements in the ocean push water over a ridge of rock there. This makes big waves. The waves can be three to four stories high. They are as loud as thunder.  
The Coastal Commission gave Titans of Mavericks just a one-year permit to have this year's competition. Titans had to agree to have a one-hour heat for six women. It also had to agree to find more ways to include female surfers.
The commission's staff recommended a four-year permit for the contest. That was what the contest's organizer, Cartel Management, Inc., wanted. The commission sharply criticized the organizers. Commissioners asked for a plan to include more women last year. Contest officials never gave one. 
Just One Heat Isn't Enough
One of the commission members is named Mark Vargas. He has pushed for more female surfers at the event. "While it's great that we have a heat, that's not a plan," he said.
The commission was concerned that approving a contest without a women's contest would not be fair. It could be considered not giving women an equal chance to ride the great waves.
Organizers eventually committed to a one-hour women's heat for six competitors and two alternates. Alternates fill in for competitors if they have to drop out. The contest has promised $30,000 in prize money for the women's contest. Organizers also proposed to include women on the contest's seven-member selection committee.
Many called the addition of one women's heat a step in the right direction. Still, they wanted to see a traditional contest format with more competitions. They also wanted prize money that was about the same as what male competitors receive. They want female big-wave surfers to choose representatives on the selection committee.
Safety Is A Concern, Organizers Say
Mavericks representatives said they supported including more women. Still, they remained concerned about pushing the limits of safety. They say these waves are bigger, colder and deadlier than at other surfing locations.
They estimated there are fewer than 10 professional female surfers able to compete at this level. They said the tight contest schedule makes it difficult to add heats.
Cassandra Clark, a member of the contest board, said women have never been intentionally left out of the event.
The female surfers selected for this year's competition are Sarah Gerhardt, Jamilah Star, Emily Erickson, Paige Alms, Keala Kennelly and Andrea Moller. Valenti was picked as the first alternate.
      
      