An ancient bird named Vegavis iaai soared high in the sky some 66 million years ago, when dinosaurs such as Tyrannosaurus rex still roamed the Earth. Some of the bird's close cousins – like the T. rex – maintained more menacing dinosaur qualities, but Vegavis iaai had evolved certain characteristics that would allow it to avoid mass extinction.
It was small and sleek, not unlike a modern duck or goose. It likely lived a life of soaring and swimming, just as modern waterbirds do. According to a study published last week, Vegavis iaai had also evolved one of the less majestic qualities of its modern relatives: It honked.
"We estimate that the species would have been capable of honk-like sounds," said the study's lead author Julia Clarke of the University of Texas at Austin. "Honk-like and quack-like."
"Cantaloupe Of Rock"
Vegavis iaai isn't a newly discovered species. The fossil was found on Vega Island in the Arctic Peninsula more than two decades ago. It took a while for the fossil to be properly prepared, because the soft, delicate bird bones were locked up tight in a hard "cantaloupe of rock" called a concretion. Fossil preparation is when scientists slowly and carefully remove the rock and sediment that surrounds a fossil, so that they can see it more clearly. After the fossil was prepared, Clarke helped to identify it as a newly discovered species in a paper published in 2005.
While analyzing the remains using high-resolution scanning equipment, Clarke found something special. Hidden in a spot where rock had not been fully removed from the specimen were signs of a syrinx, an organ found in modern birds. This organ sits near the heart and is composed of rings of thick cartilage and soft tissues. It allows birds to make their unique vocalizations.
Based on the shape of the syrinx, the researchers believe the bird would have made honks like a modern duck. This was an especially satisfying find, because Vegavis iaai was already thought to be most closely related to ducks and geese.
Other Bird Fossils Get A Second Look
Clarke feels it was a lucky find, as well because the soft tissue of the syrinx is often absent in fossils, so the fact that the structure was preserved at all is quite an achievement. If the specimen had not been so carefully prepared, with most of the rock around it removed, Clarke would not have been able to spot the syrinx. But if the rock had been completely cleared, the delicate vocal organ could have been mistakenly scraped away, as well.
It was also fortunate that Clarke was thinking about bird squawks at the time. If she hadn't already been wondering about the sounds made by avian dinosaurs, she might not have noticed the syrinx at all, she said.
Clarke and her coworkers went back to study other recently found fossils, looking for more signs of syrinxes. They have found at least one other squawk box: one in a 50-million-year-old bird that had been reported, but never studied. Clarke and her team are now talking with engineers about using the shape of the organ to reconstruct that slightly less-ancient bird's sounds. 
However, in all their searching of non-avian dinosaurs they did not find any signs of similar structures. Since they now know that syrinxes can be preserved, they suspect that this absence in the fossil record means that only would-be birds developed this structure.
The Evolution Of Flight
So when did birds first make birdlike sounds? Scientists believe that birds began to break into the branches that would lead to still-existing species around 80 million years ago, Clarke explained. 
"The big question is how much earlier it might go," Clarke said. "Just look at feathers. We used to think they were unique to just this one group, and now we have them in a lot of non-flighted dinosaurs."
But while scientists now believe that feathers first evolved for some other purpose – such as colorful mating displays or warm layers to keep out the chill – and were then adapted as birds took flight, Clarke suspects that the syrinx came along later in the game. She thinks it might have emerged sometime during the Cretaceous period, which began 145.5 million years ago. Flying might have led to honking, and it could have led to chirping and tweeting, too, depending on the shape of the syrinx.
Clarke and her team think the syrinx likely evolved after the evolution of flight, but before Vegavis iaai appeared on the scene. "But we can't be sure yet," she said. "What would be ideal is more data."
      
      