CARY, N.C. — Rosie McRackan raced around the bases at her T-ball game. She was excited, but she kept her eye on home plate.
She had hit the ball just as well as the other children on the team. 
However, unlike the other players, 6-year-old Rosie is missing part of her left arm and her entire right leg. To play ball, she wears a prosthetic, a man-made leg. This leg was made just for running.  
For Rosie, life always has been about overcoming challenges. Her parents have worked hard to make her feel like other children.
Any Kid Can Join A Team
Last year, Rosie joined the Bluejays, a T-ball team for kids from 5 to 7 years old. She played with the team again this summer.
The Bluejays are part of a program called Inclusion Services. Through this program, children with disabilities can join neighborhood sports teams.
McRackan said she wants Rosie to live the same way any other child would.
Rosie was born without her lower left arm. She is also missing her whole right leg. Some people told the McRackans it would be more difficult to raise a child like Rosie. They disagreed. Jessica McRackan said raising Rosie hasn't been any harder than raising a two-armed, two-legged baby. 
Wondering If She Could Ever Walk
Still, there were times that Jessica and her husband, Dinah, worried. They were not sure if their daughter would ever walk.
They decided to get Rosie a prosthetic leg when she was just over a year old. Using this leg, she was walking by 2 1/2. Now Rosie also has a leg made for running. This year, she got a new prosthetic arm. It is a special kind of prosthetic. It's controlled by the signals her muscles send through her body. Rosie sees many doctors to make sure her prosthetics are working just right.
When Rosie turned 5, her parents decided she would join the Bluejays.
Judy Newsome runs the Inclusion Services program. She helps children with disabilities join the right teams. She said it's important to look at what kids can do, instead of looking only at their disabilities.
Special Bat Easy To Swing
Bluejays Coach Dennis Sparks met with Rosie before the season began. He made a special bat for her. It is very light, so she can swing it with one hand. 
Sparks said Rosie is determined. 
“When she wants to do something, she’s going to do it," he said. He said that the other players give Rosie a warm welcome. He has never heard a player say anything bad about Rosie.
Newsome said she hopes the program teaches the children to move past their differences.
“Everyone wants to belong,” she said. Giving them a chance to play like everyone else is what matters, she said.
She Answers Lots Of Questions
Rosie is a happy, chatty girl. She is used to answering questions about her disability. Other children often ask her about it. 
Her experience on the T-ball team has given her a place where she fits in. It also gave the other children a chance to learn about Rosie’s differences. After the first few practices, those children stopped asking questions, Jessica McRackan said.
Rosie used to bat last, McRackan said, but this year, she was mixed in with the regular lineup. 
Now we have a little girl who runs the bases and scores for her team, McRackan said. “Just like the other kids.”
      
      