For those who come to the Riley Leroy Pitts Military and Veteran Student Center at Wichita State University in Kansas, there's a new therapist who has become quite a hit.
The therapist doesn't charge a fee, ask about childhood memories or give advice.  However, she does offer free cuddles and a break from the pressures of college life.
At times, she likes to watch squirrels and play fetch.
Dog Therapy
The therapist, actually a therapy dog in training, is a friendly rescue pooch named Riley. A 3-year-old yellow Labrador, Riley lives with Sarah Sell, director of veteran student services at Wichita State, but spends much of her week at the veterans center.
Some students call Riley the center's official mascot. The center is named after U.S. Army Captain Riley Leroy Pitts, who, in 1968, became the first black commissioned officer to receive the Medal of Honor.
"I think some of the draw to dogs and therapy dogs is that they don't care what kind of day you had – they love you no matter what," Sell said. "They don't care if you said something nasty to someone about the election, they just love that you're there to pet them. Our students really love having Riley here. They look for her."
Once they complete a training program, therapy dogs usually make visits to hospitals and rehabilitation centers. The dogs need to be mild-mannered and comfortable around people in order to be certified and approved.
Nice Distraction From Day
On a recent Tuesday afternoon at the veterans center, a room with a few tables, couches and a computer desk, Riley went from person to person, moving her head in for a snuggle or wanting to be petted.
"Riley is so goofy," said Erin Rust, a Wichita State junior who also works part-time at the center. "She's a nice distraction from your day. People can come in here upset about something that's going on in their life and after about 10 minutes around Riley, they feel better."
"You can't be mean when you look at Riley's face."
Military Students
Sell said the university has about 800 students that were in the military and now attend classes. She said about 100 will come through the center every day.
"Primarily, Riley is here to support our veterans on campus," Sell said. "Students sometimes come into my office and just curl up and cuddle with her before a big test. She helps people calm down a little bit. She's really had a positive impact."
Sell got Riley in May from Caring Hands Humane Society in Newton. She hopes to have her fully certified and approved as a therapy dog early next year. She takes Riley to training once a week and works with her at home, too.
The director also hopes a larger veterans center could be open in time for the start of the spring semester.
Sell is still active in the Air National Guard and feels the support of university president, John Bardo, has been very important.
"Wichita State has worked to improve services overall for our military and veteran students, and this includes innovative approaches, such as having a therapy dog available to help ease anxiety and stress," Bardo said in a statement.
Top School
The university's support has been noticed. On Wednesday, Wichita State announced that two military organizations named it a top school for military members and veterans.
"I've had yellow Labs all my life, so I love having Riley around," said Bryan Casey, a Navy veteran and marketing major at Wichita State. "She makes campus feel more like home. You can come (to the veterans center) and just exhale, and she's a big part of that."
      
      