Last summer, Univision went to war with Donald Trump after he called Mexicans drug dealers and violent criminals. This move was typical of the television network that views itself not just as a media company, but as an advocate and defender of the Latino community.
Now Univision, the largest Spanish-language news network in America, is launching a major voter registration and engagement campaign. Its goal is to turn out 3 million new Latino voters ahead of this year’s presidential election.
Ambitious Registration Effort
The network has published an online voter guide and is partnering with several organizations to register eligible Latinos. The population of Latinos — people who come from Latin America or are of Latin American descent — has grown 40 percent within the United States in the past eight years alone. 
Univision will broadcast public service announcements across its 126 local TV and radio stations about the importance of voting. It is enlisting one of its young stars to tell his own story about becoming a voter. A spokeswoman for the network said Univision’s campaign news team will also be bigger than for any previous election. The network already has 36 reporters and producers assigned to campaign coverage.
Critics of the network questioned whether the ambitious effort would be fair to both of America's major political parties. It is a question worth asking given the network's tussle with Republican candidate Trump and the fact that Latino voters tend to favor Democratic candidates. But Univision’s star news anchor Jorge Ramos defended his network. He said Republicans had only themselves to blame if his network’s emphasis on stories about people entering the country illegally reflects poorly on them.
“The Republican Party has had an incredible opportunity to reach Latino voters, and they failed,” Ramos said. “You cannot say, ‘Vote for me, but I want to deport your mother or your brother.’”
Network Says It Has A Duty
Univision and other Spanish-language news outlets have conducted similar voter engagement campaigns before. But Univision's efforts are coming under extra scrutiny this campaign cycle because of the network’s starring role in the presidential race.
It was during his June presidential campaign announcement that Trump insulted Mexican immigrants. Univision countered by announcing it was cutting all business ties with him and refused to air his Miss Universe beauty competition. Network officials said they had a duty to stand up for their viewers, many of whom are Latino immigrants or have family members who are. 
In Iowa last summer, Trump had Ramos ejected from one of his news conferences. Ramos questioned Trump repeatedly about the cost of his plan to deport the estimated 11 million people living in the United States who had entered the country illegally. Trump refused to answer the question and Ramos refused to stop asking it. The showdown ended when Trump had Ramos ejected from the event.
Voting Trend Leads To Raised Eyebrows
Ramos and Univision’s co-owner Haim Saban have been criticized for their own ties to Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton. Some conservatives believe this calls into question the network’s objectivity. Saban has donated several million dollars to a group working to elect Clinton and Ramos’ daughter is working on the Clinton campaign.
Then there is the fact that Latino voters tend to side with Democratic candidates. For example, two-thirds of Latinos voted for President Barack Obama in 2008. That trend has led to questions about whether Univision’s latest efforts are an attempt to create more Democratic voters.
Ken Oliver-Mendez is the director of an organization that tracks what it sees as liberal bias in the Spanish-language media. He said Univision has not covered Republicans fairly in the past, and its voter-registration efforts should be closely examined.
“We all believe in getting more people to vote,” said Oliver-Mendez, director of MRC Latino. “But we’re going to be looking critically at what issues they present as important.”
Partnership For Empowerment
Univision, Oliver-Mendez complained, puts too much emphasis on coverage of those who enter the country illegally — which he says favors Democrats — and not enough on other issues that are important to Latinos. Women's reproductive rights and the economy were two issues that Oliver-Mendez particularly felt needed more coverage.
Ramos disagreed. He said Univision covers a multitude of Latino issues and is even-handed in its coverage of all political candidates.
Ramos said his network has an obligation to its viewers, noting that 66,000 Latinos turn 18 and become eligible to vote each month. “There is truly a demographic revolution,” Ramos said. “In order to go from big numbers to true power, you need people going to vote on Election Day.”
The network has partnered with several Latino voter registration groups, including Mi Familia Vota and League of United Latin American Citizens. 
Brent Wilkes, national director of LULAC, said his organization has registration efforts underway in 22 states. It helped to register more than 10,000 Latinos in Iowa ahead of the state’s February primary. Wilkes said this effort was helped by anger caused by Trump’s comments about Mexicans.
Wilkes said he hopes the Univision partnership will help empower Latinos at a time when they have come under attack.
“We’re hoping the Latino community will stand up and defend itself,” he said.
      
      