WASHINGTON, D.C. – Anyone watching the United States’ race for president needs to understand how voting works in this country. Thanks to America’s Electoral College, it’s not who wins the most votes nationwide that matters. The more important thing is which states a person wins in.
Each state has a certain number of votes in the Electoral College. The number is based on the size of the state's population. For example, Wyoming has 585,000 people so it gets three electoral votes. California has 39,000,000 people. It gets 55 votes. The person who gets 270 electoral votes wins the presidency. 
In almost every state, a person who wins just over half the vote gets all of its electoral votes. So, if someone wins 50.1 percent of the votes, he or she is awarded 100 percent of its electoral votes. Only Maine and Nebraska don’t follow this winner-take-all rule. As a result, the votes of millions of people end up not counting. If you’re a Republican in New York or California, your vote for president won't matter. It is because most voters in these states are Democrats. The same is true for a Democrat in Wyoming or Mississippi. These are generally Republican states. 
How The Electoral College Works
There are some concerns with this peculiar system. For example, a person can win the popular vote but lose in the Electoral College. It doesn’t happen often. Whenever it does, the U.S. goes through a fit. Some people get angry because it doesn't seem like the people's choice matters. In 2000, Al Gore won the popular vote, but George W. Bush won the presidency.
Due to the Electoral College, voters actually vote for a group of electors who will support their choice. The electors meet in their state capitol and cast the vote. We usually know before then who will get a state's electoral votes. The results of the popular vote are reported during election day.
If no one wins 270 Electoral College votes, the election goes to the House of Representatives. Each state casts a single vote, no matter its population size. The states aren’t bound to vote for the person who won the most votes in their state.
The Senate picks the vice president. Each of the 100 senators gets one vote. It’s possible that Congress could elect a president and vice president from different parties.
The Electoral College shows the doubt America’s founding fathers had about completely relying on the people to make decisions. They were suspicious of the public having its way. They were worried people might vote based on bad information or a lack of understanding. 
Alexander Hamilton worried about giving power to the people because “they seldom judge or determine right.” Fearing trouble, they added limits between what the people wanted and government decisions.
Why Swing States Are Important
This system has an enormous effect on the people running for the presidency. It determines where they spend their time and money. Only about 10 states are considered “swing” states that could go for either party. The rest are considered “safe” states for one party or the other.
Of course, sometimes a state bounces out of its party. But the 10 “battleground” states are the ones to watch for clues as to how the election will turn out. 
For example, California and New York are routinely Democratic. People running for president only visit there to raise money. On the other hand, Ohio is the jewel in the crown of swing states. The past shows that no Republican can win the presidency without winning there. The other states considered most important to victory for either side are Florida and Pennsylvania.
The Democrats have an advantage in the Electoral College. Highly populated states usually go Democratic. So Donald Trump is widely believed to be more limited for getting 270 votes.
Maybe the Electoral College isn’t such a peculiar idea, after all.

Elizabeth Drew is a regular contributor to The New York Review of Books and the author, most recently, of "Washington Journal: Reporting Watergate and Richard Nixon's Downfall."

      
      