Latinos withstand life's wear and tear better than non-Latino Caucasians, according to a new method of measuring the way humans age. They might have their Native American ancestors to thank for their longer lives.
The new findings offer some clues about a longstanding demographic, or ethnicity-related, mystery. Despite having higher rates of diseases like obesity and diabetes, Latinos in the United States have a longer average lifespan than do non-Latino whites.
These findings emerge from scientists' efforts to come up with a standard measure of a person's age more revealing than birthdays, walking speed or wrinkled skin. They call this measure a biological clock. With it, researchers hope to uncover why some people die young while others live long. They also hope to understand what long-term diseases have to do with aging, and to predict and increase patients' lifespans. A reliable measure of biological age could also make it easier to judge the effectiveness of anti-aging therapies.
Epigenetic Clock-Watching
At the University of California, Los Angeles, biological data scientist Steve Horvath has devised one such measure of aging. His measure reflects the activity level of a set of signals called the epigenome. An individual's epigenome prompts their genes to change over time in response to new demands.
Horvath's "epigenetic clock" captures one key feature of aging. As we grow older, there are complicated but predictable changes in the rate at which our genes are switched on and off by a chemical process called DNA methylation. To figure out how quickly a person is aging, Horvath has proposed to measure epigenetic activity at 353 sites in a person's genome.
Earlier efforts to devise an epigenetic clock suggested that aging works differently between populations and from person to person. But the tissues in each of us may also age at different rates. That might explain, for instance, why some organs and tissues are more often affected by age-related diseases like cancer.
The new study, published this week in the journal Genome Biology, set out to refine and test Horvath's new clock. He and his team analyzed samples of blood, saliva and a specific type of white blood cell collected from 5,162 participants in a wide range of studies.
The Slow Aging Of The Tsimane' Amerindian Tribe
The study included many types of people, such as black, white and Latino Americans. It also included Han Chinese, members of the Tsimane' Amerindian tribe in South America, and two separate groups of Central Africans: rain-forest dwelling hunter-gatherers and farmers living in grasslands and open savannas.
The Tsimane', native people who live off the land in the lowlands of Bolivia, offer an especially good test of the epigenetic clock. The Tsimane' are constantly bombarded with bacterial, viral and parasitic infections. Because of this, they typically experience high rates of inflammation, which has widely been seen as a marker for aging. But they rarely show risk factors for heart disease or develop diabetes as they age, and they virtually never become obese or suffer high blood pressure.
The epigenetic clock found that the Tsimane' aged even more slowly than Latinos. The biological clock calculated the age of their blood as two years younger than Latinos and four years younger than Caucasians.
But that finding was despite strong evidence that over the age of 35, a Tsimane's immune system was close to exhausted. At that age, a Tsimane' person's inflammation levels "make him look like a 90-year-old," Horvath said.
"This result sheds light on what is frequently called the Hispanic paradox," he added. Horvath said his study suggests that what gives Latinos their advantage is their Native American ancestry, which makes them more genetically similar to the Tsimane'.
Horvath emphasized that Latinos' slower aging rate cannot be explained by lifestyle factors such as diet, income, education or weight. Researchers accounted for these factors.
Validating Existing Observations
The study may also shed light on a different demographic oddity. Once African-Americans have reached the age of 85, they tend to live longer than Caucasians of the same age. Using a new gauge of biological aging, the authors of the latest research found that older African-Americans age more slowly than do Caucasians of the same chronological age.
The measure also finds that women age more slowly than men, and that aging is accelerated in those with less education and slows after a person goes to college. Those findings, too, may help explain existing observations. For example, despite suffering more illness, women statistically live longer than men, and more education is known to be linked to a longer lifespan.
Because they match up with such baffling patterns, the new study's findings offer some validation of the epigenetic clock. Several other studies have begun to validate the clock's accuracy and reliability. It is being tested in populations known to age differently from the norm, including people with Down syndrome, HIV infection and Parkinson's disease. In three separate studies, the clock has been found to accurately predict people's lifespans, even after researchers adjusted for chronological age and a range of factors that can worsen health.
"This effort is very novel and exciting," said Max Guo, chief of the division of aging biology at the National Institute of Aging, which has funded Horvath's research. Guo said that biological clocks that use large panels of markers — not just epigenetics but other measures of well-being — would likely be needed to understand aging. "But this is promising," he said.
      
      