If life was fair in the animal kingdom, the solenodon would be as famous as the tiger. A solenodon is a rabbit-sized mammal that looks like a mouse with a really long nose. It is only found on two Caribbean islands: Cuba and Hispaniola (the Dominican Republic and Haiti make up Hispaniola).
Surviving Dinosaurs, Asteroid, Ice Age
The main reason the solenodon is a real star in the animal kingdom is that it somehow survived the asteroid collision that killed off the dinosaurs. It then survived the next 66 million years, dodging other threats, from Ice Ages to humans. 
Adam Brandt says the solenodon line broke off from other mammals about 78 million years ago. Brandt was the lead author of a recent study that looked closely at the solenodon’s mitochondrial DNA. Mitochondrial DNA is passed down from the mother. It changes very little over generations.
Researchers are not entirely sure where the various solenodon populations were located when the asteroid hit. They might have been on the landmasses that became modern-day Cuba and Hispaniola, or on the mainland. They believe the solendons were close to where the asteroid struck in Chicxulub, Mexico.
"It's Truly Remarkable"
“It’s truly remarkable that the solenodons survived this direct hit,” says Samuel Turvey. He is an expert on animals that are becoming extinct. Turvey is a scientist with the Zoological Society of London (ZSL).
There are just two surviving species of solenodon today. One is found on Cuba and the other, which is more well-known, is on Hispaniola. Yet these two species are so distinct from any other mammal that they represent an entire biological family: Solenodontidae. Every other species of mice and rat are grouped in a single family of more than 700 species. 
Solenodons have some weird qualities. They can squeeze venomous saliva out of their incisor teeth. They have a ball-and-socket joint in their snout to give it extra-special maneuverability. They likely use echolocation to find prey. This means they can locate objects in the dark by sending out sound waves that bounce back to them. They have tiny eyes and long claws, and they waddle when they walk. 
But Don't Chop Down Those Trees
Solenodons sleep in their burrows during the day and come out at night to eat grubs and insects, probably just as they did 78 million years ago. Today, they don’t have to worry about being stepped on by a tyrannosaur. Instead, their problems are having their forests chopped down by people or being eaten by a dog or a mongoose.
The Hispaniola solenodon is considered endangered by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN). Two of its subspecies might be close to extinction, which is even worse. The Cuban solenodon is also considered endangered.
Norvis Hernandez, a Cuban biologist, is one of the few people on Earth who has seen a living, wild Cuban solenodon. Smaller than its Hispaniola cousin, the Cuban solenodon is easily recognized by its black-and-white hair.
A Rare Touch
“This experience of watching this ancient species (was) wonderful,” Hernandez said. She caught a female solenodon in Alejandro Humboldt National Park for a brief study before releasing it again. “I cannot explain what I felt the first time I touched it.”
The Cuban solenodon’s keen senses of smell and hearing make it almost impossible to easily capture. The species not only avoids humans, but is never tricked by the usual mechanical traps scientists use to catch small mammals.
Turvey and his team recently discovered that the Hispaniolan species is actually three distinct subspecies.
The Latest Threats
One subspecies is found in a single forest in Haiti and might be dangerously close to extinction. Another is found throughout most of the northern Dominican Republic. The third is located across the southern Dominican mountain range, Sierra de Bahoruco, that includes several parks, and is the best-protected of the subspecies.
The solenodon in Haiti could be the most threatened of all, where it survives only in the Massif de la Hotte region.
Haiti has been losing forests for centuries, and the charcoal industry continuously chops down trees. Solenodons are running out of forest to live in. Locals also kill them for food.
The Last Survivors
In 2009, several conservation groups kick-started a three-year research and conservation program on the Hispaniola solenodon called The Last Survivors. Researchers have learned more about the solenodon, but it has not helped to save them.
Newspapers stopped writing about the solenodon after the program ended in 2012, and species out of the public eye do not get much money. 
Solenodons survived the dinosaurs, an asteroid and humans, but the big question is: can they survive if no one is paying attention?
      
      