MINNEAPOLIS, Minn. — Last fall, Target took its first baby steps toward stores with fewer gender-specific items. It took down “boys” and “girls” signs in toy and children's bedding aisles. 
Now, Target is taking it further with a new kids’ home decor brand that blurs the lines between what is for girls and what is for boys. The new Target brand, Pillowfort, began hitting stores this month. It replaced another longtime Target brand, Circo. Target is making big changes to the kids' department as the store looks to take back its style edge.
“It was an aisle of pink, fairy princesses, ponies and flowers,” Julie Guggemos, Target’s senior vice president of design and product development, said of Target’s current offerings for children’s bedrooms. “And for the boys it was rockets and dinosaurs. Well, you know what? Girls like rockets and basketball. And boys like ponies.
“Who are we to say what a child’s individual expression is? We really wanted to develop a collection that would be universal.”
Astronauts, Alligators Up For Grabs
There will still be pink and blue found in Pillowfort products, just less of it. The prints and patterns are more open-ended: trees, arrows, astronauts and bicycles. Plus, themes that traditionally have been more gender-specific, such as basketballs, hearts and alligators, are more up for grabs with colors such as white, black and yellow.
Guggemos showed off some of the new products at Target’s headquarters in Minneapolis, Minnesota. She picked up items that can appeal to either gender, such as pillows in the shapes of a cactus and an octopus.
“All of this right here is gender-neutral,” she said, gathering up about half of the bedsheets. “This could go boy or girl.”
Toy Aisle Signs Changed First
The people who run Target say they did not start Pillowfort with a gender agenda in mind. Rather, they say, the approach is being driven by customers.
“It gets back to listening to mom, understanding what she’s looking for from Target and making sure we’re delivering the products,” Target CEO Brian Cornell said.
It was customer feedback in the form of social-media posts criticizing Target’s gender-based signs that initially led Target to rethink those aisle signs. Target's move was greeted with cheers by many. Still, it was also met with boos from some who said there is nothing wrong with more traditional gender activities. Others complained that the gender-based signs helped guide them to buy appropriate gifts. To answer that concern, Target will still have girls and boys bedding search terms on its website when Pillowfort launches. However, many products will show up in both groups.
“They’re making bold moves,” said Carol Spieckerman, an expert on shopping brands. The changes Target is making cannot be done without leaving some people out, she said.
Kids Wanted Different Choices
When creating Pillowfort, Target found that the desire for more colors and patterns that could be for either gender was common. It was a theme Target’s designers and researchers heard again and again.
They saw it reflected in the collages they asked kids to create of their ideal bedrooms. They heard it from families when they visited customers’ homes in Chicago and Los Angeles. They heard it from parents who asked Target to make colors less gender-specific. They saw it when they held a kids fair and asked them to choose their favorite patterns.
“Girls were picking prints that the boys picked and vice versa,” Guggemos said. “They’re not afraid to express who they are. We picked up on that right away and decided we were getting in our own way a little bit with some of those paradigms… It’s time to change.”
      
      