The former head of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority has called for a ban on all new coal mines in Australia. He said the move is needed to protect the Great Barrier Reef from climate change.
“I love the reef and I have worked to preserve it since 1979; I will oppose anything that threatens to destroy it,” said Graeme Kelleher, who was the first chief executive of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority. He held that position for 16 years. “The Great Barrier Reef is one of the seven wonders of the world,” he said.
The largest living thing on Earth, the Great Barrier Reef spans more than 1,200 miles of islands and underwater reefs. It is home to countless fish, molluscs and other sea life, and is comprised of over 600 types of hard and soft coral. Scientists and environmentalists believe that carbon-dioxide emissions produced by the fossil fuel industry — including coal mines — are putting the reef at risk.
Coal Industry And Great Barrier Reef Cannot Exist In Harmony
Kelleher is also a member of the Ocean Elders, a group of global leaders concerned about ocean conservation that includes Richard Branson, James Cameron, Jane Goodall and E.O. Wilson. “Australia cannot have a healthy Great Barrier Reef and a continuing coal industry,” Kelleher said.
Kelleher added his name to a petition started by Greenpeace Australia Pacific, calling on the prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, to put an immediate ban on new coal mines. Greenpeace is a controversial environmental group, considered too extreme by some. Greenpeace uses protests and other forms of direct action to draw attention to its causes. In the past, some of its members have been charged with criminal activity. 
The Australian government faces an approaching deadline for reporting to a UNESCO committee on its handling of the reef. UNESCO is the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. It keeps a World Heritage List of valued sites around the world. The Great Barrier Reef is one of these sites.
Reef Could Become An Endangered World Heritage Site
After Australia submits the report, UNESCO will decide whether or not to again consider putting the Great Barrier Reef on its list of endangered World Heritage sites. The list names sites UNESCO believes are threatened by human or environmental factors.
The government will need to report on how it has funded and implemented its Reef 2050 plan, a long-term plan for protecting the reef. It will also need to explain how a recent bleaching event has affected the reef.
Since UNESCO last considered including the Great Barrier Reef on its list, the reef has undergone the worst bleaching event in recorded history. According to government agencies, 22 percent of the reef was killed in one hit, as unusually warm waters bleached and killed the coral.
That comes at the end of a long-term decline of the reef, Kelleher said.
Reef Has Lost 50 Percent Of Its Coral
“Over the last 30 years, the reef has lost 50 percent of its coral cover and one of the major causes of this is climate change,” Kelleher said.
Kelleher said the continued health of the reef demanded action on climate change and a halt to all new or expanded coal mines.
He said one coal mine in particular — the huge Carmichael coal mine, currently planned by the multinational company the Adani Group — must not go ahead. The Australian Conservation Foundation (ACF) is currently fighting the Adani Group in Australia's high court. They want the court to overturn the federal environmental approval of the new mine.
The ACF will argue, on appeal to the high court, that emissions from the burning of coal dug up from the mine will worsen climate change. This will further harm the Great Barrier Reef. The government has argued, successfully so far, that there is no link between the mine’s coal and climate change.
Reef Is Under Threat
Kelleher said that a scientifically minded court would recognize that a link does in fact exist. “Although the coal will not be burned in Australia, it will still be burned in India and that will affect the Great Barrier Reef,” he said.
Greenpeace Australia Pacific reef campaigner Shani Tager said of Kelleher, “Graeme is a giant when it comes to the Great Barrier Reef and has a wealth of experience and knowledge about the threats it faces. His comments are a stark reminder of our need to take serious action to save the reef.”
      
      