The solar system is surprisingly wet.
In space, water is everywhere. It's frozen in flying chunks of space rock and floating in the atmospheres of gas giants, huge planets composed mostly of gas. Perhaps most remarkable of all, water is also sloshing about in huge oceans hidden under the icy crusts of far-away moons.
These moons are known as "ocean worlds." If there is life in our solar system beyond Earth, there's a decent chance it lives in one of these places. At the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute, dozens of oceanographers and planetary scientists came together Thursday to discuss how we might explore such worlds.
It would be a long trip to the frigid outer edges of our solar system, but there are plenty of beaches to stop at along the way. (You may not want to go swimming in them, though.) Here are a few of the most intriguing ocean worlds.
Europa

This moon of Jupiter has the smoothest surface of any object in the solar system. It has a thick, icy crust streaked with reddish marks, which scientists think could be deposits of salt from an interior sea. The liquid ocean beneath Europa's crust is kept from freezing by "tidal heating." This means that the act of orbiting Jupiter keeps the moon's interior warm. Europa might share some key characteristics with the oceans on Earth. A study from NASA's Jet Propulsion Lab earlier this year suggested that the moon could have the right balance of chemicals to allow for living organisms. A NASA mission to do several long flybys of Europa is already in the works.
Enceladus

In 2005, NASA's Cassini spacecraft noticed something strange going on near the surface of Enceladus, one of Saturn's moons. Geyser-like jets of water vapor, carbon dioxide and other gases and particles were erupting from cracks near the moon's south pole. Beneath Enceladus' craggy surface, a liquid ocean is being stirred up by volcanic activity in the moon's rocky interior. It is thought that life on Earth first evolved around similar sea vents on our planet. This characteristic makes Enceladus fascinating to astrobiologists. Carolyn Porco, the imaging team leader for the Cassini mission, said Thursday, that the moon shows promise. She said some astrobiologists regard Enceladus as the best place in the solar system to look for extraterrestrial life. 
Ganymede
Ganymede, Jupiter's biggest moon, is the largest moon in our solar system and the only one with its own magnetic field. Researchers have said Ganymede has a large, salty ocean sandwiched between an inner and outer layer of rock. It could even have several oceans layered between sheets of ice, like a very strange club sandwich.
Titan

Saturn's largest moon is the only place in the solar system known to have liquid lakes on its surface (other than Earth, of course). The far-flung moon is super cold, with an average surface temperature of minus-292 degrees Fahrenheit. Lakes filled with water would freeze at this temperature, but Titan's lakes are filled with liquid methane and ethane. Scientists think there is a liquid ocean below the surface of Titan. This ocean layer is believed to cause the moon to morph and deform as it responds to Saturn's gravitational pull. Titan has been called the most Earth-like world ever discovered, and it could, in theory, support life.
Earth
 
There are parts of Earth's oceans that are as foreign to scientists as any extraterrestrial sea. Scientists didn't discover lifeforms around deep-sea vents until 1977. Before then, they imagined the dark, deep ocean as a lifeless place. "Of all the earthbound sciences," said Chris German, a geologist at Woods Hole, "the ocean sciences might be about as close to possible as the science of space."
      
      