How much does it cost to have a child with a food allergy? It might depend on how much money you have.
Eight percent of children in the United States are allergic to certain foods. Almost 40 percent of those children have experienced a life-threatening emergency caused by eating one of those foods.
Dr. Ruchi Gupta led a new, just-published study on the treatment of food allergies among children. Allergic reactions to food, she said, include "hives, throat closing or feeling itchy, swelling around the mouth or other parts of the body, trouble breathing, fainting and dizziness. And it can be caused by just a little bit of the food that you are allergic to.”
Kids with food allergies are allergic to a wide range of foods. Some of the most common food allergies include eggs, dairy products, peanuts, tree nuts like pistachios and walnuts, shellfish, wheat and soy.
Prevention And Treatment Can Be Costly
Children with food allergies need to make frequent visits to doctors, and sometimes go to hospital emergency rooms. The cost of their treatment can be high. 
Gupta and her team wanted to find out just how much families are spending on such treatment. What they found is that it varies, depending on how much money a household has.
They found that poorer families are spending more.
The new study was published this week. The households Gupta studied were divided into three different income levels: those with an annual income of less than $50,000, those with an income of $50,000 to $100,000 a year, and those with an income of more than $100,000 a year.
Wealthy Families Spend Less
Gupta's study found that households earning less than $50,000 a year spent the most money on treating children who have food allergies. Compared with wealthier families, they spent 2.5 times as much on emergency room visits and hospital stays. The lowest-income families spent on average $1,021 a year. By comparison, the highest-income group spent only $416 a year.
The lowest-income group also spent slightly more on doctor visits than higher-income groups. At the same time, families that make more than $100,000 a year spent more on visits to doctors who specialize in allergies. Such specialists can help figure out which foods are causing an allergic reaction. They can be expensive and are not usually visited during an emergency.
Gupta said her study suggests that households with the lowest incomes may not be able to afford preventative treatment for children with food allergies. Such treatment includes buying special foods and seeing an allergy specialist. Poorer kids may also be less likely to have an epinephrine auto-injector. These devices, which allow a person to quickly inject themselves with adrenaline, can be used to stop an allergic reaction.
Making Sure Poor Kids Receive Preventative Treatment
Without these tools, Gupta said, poor kids are more likely to wind up in the emergency room with a severe allergic reaction.
“There are currently no treatments for food allergies, so all we have is prevention,” she said. “And the only way to prevent an allergic reaction is to not come in contact with the food.”
One finding that surprised Gupta is that African-American children with food allergies visit emergency rooms less often than other groups. 
“We’re not sure what to make of that,” she said. “But it definitely makes me want to do a deeper dive to understand food allergies in different populations.”
Gupta said lower-income kids need to receive the kinds of treatment that might prevent food allergies.
“These poorer kids are not getting the same preventative treatment as other children,” she said. We need to "change that in so many ways.”
      
      