BUFFALO, N.Y. — Ryan Lysek is the new vice president of his fifth-grade class. His classmate lost the job for breaking anti-bullying rules. Now Ryan wonders how people running for president can use bad language. They also call each other names.
Nasty tweets and TV ads of Republicans are heard every day. They go against today's anti-bullying rules in schools. They were started after some tragic deaths a few years ago.
David Arenstam is a high school teacher. His students ask why Donald Trump wants to ban groups such as Muslims. They wonder why hate groups, like the KKK, are being talked about.
Trump calls Ted Cruz a "loser." He calls him a "liar." He puts down Mexicans. Marco Rubio calls Trump a thief. He says Trump has the "worst spray tan in America."
Respectful Students Praised
Cindy Lysek, Ryan's mother, says she does not care about spray tans. She wants to hear about plans for the future.
The Democrats have two people running for president. They are Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders. They talk about plans for the country. They do not insult each other.
Sioux City, Iowa, had a different kind of problem. Superintendent Paul Gausman had to decide if Trump could have a rally in a school. Students protested. They used anti-bullying rules to try to stop it. Gausman let Trump use the school. He said free speech and the right to have a meeting were the reasons. He was proud of the students. They were respectful.
Campaign Sends A "Horrible Message"
This campaign is hard to explain. It goes against the way students should respect one another.
Kris Owen is an Ohio school counselor. She was honored at the White House for being a good counselor. She says the mean words need to be talked about.
She asks students, "How would you feel if someone was saying these things about you?"  She asks them to think of positive, fair words. Negative, mean words should not be used.  
Ryan's teacher, Kelly Gasior, worries about the anti-bullying programs. Some started after President Barack Obama's 2011 White House anti-bullying meetings. Some help bullied gay youth.
Gasior says, "These people that want to be president are completely turning it around and sending this horrible message." They are saying, "I'm a bully and that's how I want to get into the presidency."
      
      